Maize is the most important coarse grain for which around  ha of land area devoted annually the second highest extent of land next to rice.
Our annual maize requirement is about  mt from which we import about  mt at a cost of rupees  million rupees mainly for utilizing in the provender industry.
Local consumption is estimated at  tons and the requirements for Thriposha and other industries about  tons and  tons respectively.
In addition to that we import maize products such as corn flakes corn oil corn starch and corn flour for different uses.
Virtually maize is utilized for production of over  different products and biproducts worldwide.
Deep loamy fertile soils rich in organic matter are preferred for satisfactory growth.
Welldrained soils with adequate moisture supply are required for uninterrupted growth of this crop.
By establishing the crops with the onset of the rainy season the crops can be harvested before depletion of soil moisture.
They can be planted in maha similarly as with other major crops that need  months to mature and a longer rainy season for uninterrupted growth.
Deep ploughing up to  cm is favorable for maize that have deep growth.
Ridges can be made at cm apart for maize planting.
Seeds are planted on ridges to avoid water logging in heavy rainy periods.
Sufficient drains are provided to drain off excess water during rainy periods.
For maize seeds are planted at cm x cm one platn per hill or Maize also can be planted at cm x cm with two plants per hill especially for tall varieties to provide more light.
In Maha these crops can be raised as rain fed as well with supplementary irrigation when there are drought periods.
Maha crop can be established with Maha rains that occur in latter part of September or first week of October for successful growth.
Yala crops should be established with Yala rains that fall in later part of April.
By timely cultivation pest problems can be reduced.
Weeds could be controlled by manual methods such as weeding and application pre and post emergent weed killers.
Crops need to be maintained weed free at least until flowering stage.
Root and stalk rots and foliar diseases such as leaf blight and sheath blight are common in humid days in maize.
Crops are harvested shelled and cleaned manually when grain moisture is low and after physiological maturity is reached.
Seed moisture is lowered by sun drying to a safer level before shelling the seeds.
As post harvest facilities are yet to develop except seed that need special attention and storage conditions commercial grain are disposed as quickly as possible to avoid wastage by pest and diseases.
As a result a fair priced to most products.
About  of maize and sorghum are used in feed production.
According to above table labour requirement for a hectare of maize is about  units Where hired labour is used labour requirements are as double as these as most of the operations are labour involved.
About  of the cost of production goes for labour which can be lowered by mechanizing the cultivation where it is possible.
Finger millet is one of important food crops in Sri Lanka.
That can be cultivated under adverse soil and climatic conditions mostly as a rain fed crop.
Millets are important crops in tropical regions of the world due to their resistance to pests and diseases short growing season and productivity under hardy and drought conditions when major cereals cannot be relied upon to provide sustainable yields.
Kurakkan grains are highly nutritious and have an excellent seed storage quality.
They are also recognized for their health beneficial effects such as antidiabetic antitumerogenic atherosclerogenic effects antioxidant and antimicrobial properties.
Most of the finger millet cultivations were observed as shifting cultivation Chena in Sri Lanka late .
Extent of finger millet cultivation has decreased from  ha in late s to  ha  due to forest clearance regulations in the mean time the traditionally finger millet cultivated lands are being replaced by other comparable and competitive crops such as maize pulses and vegetables.
Productivity of finger millet has been increased from mtha in late  to mtha in year  due to newly improved varieties and adoption of improved cultivation practices specially irrigated transplanted method of crop establishment.
Finger millet has low glicimic index Therefore low blood sugar levels have observed after a finger millet diet thereby reacting as a safer food and popular food among diabetic patients in the country.
It is rich in Calcium which helps in strengthening bones and as excellent source of natural calcium for growing children and aging people.
It is a very good source of natural Iron and consumption helps in the condition of Anaemia.
Kurakkan contains high amount of fiber which gets digested at slower rate controlling excessive food consumption; it will help to lose body weight.
Consumption of finger millet helps to reduce body cholesterol level also helps in relaxing body naturally.
Specially green kurakkan is recommended for lactating mothers under reduced milk production.
Finger millet is good for prevention of premature aging.
Finger millet is presently grown in Anuradapura Monoragala Hambantoda Kegalla Ratnapura Nuweraliya Matale Ampara Badulla and Jaffna districts.
Seeds of the varieties Rawana and Oshadha are produced and distributed by the Department of Agriculture DOA as high yielding varieties.
Finger millet is an important food crop grown in rainfed uplands in the Dry zone and Intermediate zone of Sri Lanka.
Interesting crop characteristics of finger millet are the ability to withstand cultivation at altitudes over  meters above sea level.
The optimal average growth temperature range is   °C but it can withstand up to  C Pollen viability up to  C .
Finger millet can be cultivated where receives average rainfall of  mm per year requirement for growth and development.
It is one of the few crops that can be grown during in low land paddy fields during Yala season if water logging is prevented.
Finger millet grows well in all welldrained soils but silt loams are the most desirable.
Finger millet can be cultivated in moderately acidic soils pH  also moderately alkaline soils pH.
It grows well on Reddish brown earth Calcic red yellow latasols and sandy regosols.Land preparation is commenced with first showers of Maha season and seed sowing or transplanting is done in the later part of month of October For Yala season cultivation land preparation is done at the nd week of March seed sowing and transplanting is practiced at the first week of April.
Irrigation is provided once in every  days until seedlings are established.
During dry period supplementary irrigation is provided at weekly intervals.
Millet seedlings are slow growing and require a weed free environment up to  days to develop vigorous plants.
Seedlings in rows facilitate weed control.
Stem borer and Aphids are identified as high pest in finger millet cultivation.
The damage starts from the seedling stage and continues till maturity.
Heavy blast damages could be observed specially during Maha season in dry and intermediate zone of Sri Lanka
under heavy rainfall conditions.
The disease occurs at all the stages of the crop as leaf neck and finger blast.
If the young seedlings are infected they give burnt appearance and death of the plants due to severe leaf blast.
In leaf blast disease appears on leaf lamina with typical spindle shaped spots and severe infestation spots enlarge and gave blasted appearance.
In neck blast neck region get attacked blackened and may break away from the point of infection.
In finger blast infection occurs on fingers starting from the apical part to base and shriveled blackened seeds may resulted.
The highest extent of  ha of finger millet was recorded in  and thereafter declined sharply to the present extent of  ha in .
The total production and average yield is  mt and mtha respectively.
Finger millet seeds are exported in small amount which is negligible.
It is imported to meet requirements of the industries due to shortage of local products.
Sorghum is a contender to maize in the provender industry which dependant up on the grain price in the world market.
The International Crop Research Institute for the SemiArid Tropics ICRISAT in India has developed germ plasm which are highly suitable for both food and feed purposes.
Poor demand arising from more popularity of other major cereals and high bird damage are the main reasons for less popularity of the crop when both quality and yield are superior in newly improved varieties.
Deep loamy fertile soils rich in organic matter are preferred for satisfactory growth.
Welldrained soils with adequate moisture supply are required for uninterrupted growth of this crop.
By establishing the crops with the onset of the rainy season the crops can be harvested before depletion of soil moisture.
They can be planted in maha similarly as with other major crops that need  months to mature and a longer rainy season for uninterrupted growth.
Deep ploughing up to  cm is favourable for sorghum that has deep growth.
Ridges can be made at cm apart for sorghum planting.
Seeds are planted on ridges to avoid water logging in heavy rainy periods.
Sufficient drains are provided to drain off excess water during rainy periods.
In Maha these crops can be raised as rain fed as well with supplementary irrigation when there are drought periods.
Maha crop can be established with Maha rains that occur in latter part of September or first week of October for successful growth.
Yala crops should be established with Yala rains that fall in later part of April.
By timely cultivation pest problems can be reduced.
Weeds could be controlled by manual methods such as weeding and application pre and post emergent weed killers.
Crops need to be maintained weed free at least until flowering stage.
During dry periods irrigations are required every  days depending on the severity of the drought and type of soil.
Root and stalk rots and foliar diseases such as leaf blight and sheath blight are common in humid days  Sorghum is also highly susceptible to rots.
Crops are harvested shelled and cleaned manually when grain moisture is low and after physiological maturity is reached.
Seed moisture is lowered by sun drying to a safer level before shelling the seeds.
As post harvest facilities are yet to develop except seed that need special attention and storage conditions commercial grain are disposed as quickly as possible to avoid wastage by pest and diseases.
As a result a fair priced to most products.
About  of maize and sorghum are used in feed production.
Common millets otherwise known as Meneri consist of two grain sizes.
Smaller type the little millets normally lack uniformity in maturity resulting heavy grain losses due to shattering.
Larger grained proso millets are more uniform in maturity and are capable of giving grain yields up to  tons in about  days.
They are especially suitable for growing in yala season with the onset of the rains.
Foxtail Millet Setaria italica L. Beauv.
Schult.
and Kodo Millet  Paspalum scrobilatum L. both take over three months to mature and have yield potentials of over three tons per hectare.
These cropss are known as the crops of the poorest of the poor.
They are less important both economically and as a food due to poor yields and less popularity as food or feed.
Common millets and foxtail millets are used in indigenous medicine foxtail millet is specially used in snake poisoning.
New improved varieties are more suitable for both food and feed purposes.
Normally seeded at recommended spacing appropriate to individual crop.
Deep loamy fertile soils rich in organic matter are preferred for satisfactory growth.
Welldrained soils with adequate moisture supply are required for uninterrupted growth of this crop.By establishing the crops with the onset of the rainy season the crops can be harvested before depletion of soil moisture.
They can be planted in maha similarly as with other major crops that need  months to mature and a longer rainy season for uninterrupted growth.
In Maha these crops can be raised as rainfed as well with supplementary irrigation when there are drought periods.
Maha crop can be established with Maha rains that occur in latter part of September or first week of October for successful growth.
Yala crops should be established with Yala rains that fall in later part of April.
By timely cultivation pest problems can be reduced.
Weeds could be controlled by manual methods such as weeding and application pre and post emergent weed killers.
Crops need to be maintained weed free at least until flowering stage.
During dry periods irrigations are required every  days depending on the severity of the drought and type of soil.
Minor millets are less affected by diseases.
Crops are harvested shelled and cleaned manually when grain moisture is low and after physiological maturity is reached.
Seed moisture is lowered by sun drying to a safer level before shelling the seeds.
As post harvest facilities are yet to develop except seed that need special attention and storage conditions commercial grain are disposed as quickly as possible to avoid wastage by pest and diseases.
As a result a fair priced to most products.
Following varieties are recommended for Sri Lankan conditions considering factors such as high yield seed setting ability storage adaptability pungency and colour etc.
Variety was developed at IARI New Delhi India.
It is well adapted to dry zone of Sri Lanka.
days to mature the crop.
Average yield is about   mtha.
High pungency Light rose in colour.
Originated from India.
Well adapted to dry zone in Sri Lanka .
Takes   days to mature the crop.
The yield is about  mtha with better storability.
light rose in colour High pungency.
Bulb colour is slightly rose.
Medium pungency.
days takes for maturity Light rose colour Medium pungency.
Mainly cultivate as vegetable.
Dark red in colour poor storability.
To control the spread of disease through seed add  g from the one of above fungicides to  kg of seeds and mix thoroughly.
Increase the exposure time and watering interval should be increased.
The seedlings which have  leaves  cm height slightly bulbs is marked and with the age of about  days are better to transplant.
It is very essential to select the seedlings prior to planting to achieve good bulb yield.
Onion crop can be successfully produced on most fertile soils.
soil pH in the range  is usually recommended .
But on organic soils a lower pH is satisfactory.
Suitable soil types  Reddish Brown Earth and Regosols  are available in the dry zone of sri lanka.
It is very important to decide the proper time of nursery application because it decides the time of planting.
In Sri Lanka it is recommended from early April to early May for nursery application.
The climatic requirement of the crop is in the country prevailed during Yala season May to September.
Therefore it is essential to transplant by mid May  mid June to achieve good yields.
Crop establishment using dry sets is practiced during late Maha December to February
However climatic conditions are not favorable to the crop during this period.
Therefore set planting is not much popular.
Welldrained land selection is essential.
Cropping site is very critical factor to decide the yield.
Primary weed control is needed prior to land preparation.
This can be done by manually or using none selective weed killer Glyposate apply when weeds are actively growing and  day before land preparation.
Plough the land at the depth of  inch and prepare the soil smoothly.
At the initial stages of the crop water requirement is high.
Therefore it is necessary to irrigate about day intervals and later it can be increased.
This intervals may be depend on the soil type.
However after irrigation drainage improving is very essential unless the crop may fail due to ill drainage condition.
Two weeks before harvesting water supply should be stopped to increase the quality of the harvest.
Most damaging pest in Sri Lanka.
Warmer and windy climate at July Augustpromote to increase the pest population .
Rasp and pierce the leaf cells and sap release.
Insect active when at the poor sunlight in the morning and evening.
Initially irregular white spots can be seen on leaves.
Later become large and brown oval shaped spots with pink colour margins.
Finally become black patches.
Initially oval shape whitish sunken patches can be seen.
Later conidia can be seen on this patches Twisted leaves become yellow.
Finally bulbs rot may happen.
Irregular white spots on leaves.
Yellowing and drying from the tip of the leaves.
elect medium size uniform   gbulb mother bulbs from recommended variety with related characters and store up to December.
Vernalized  store bulbs under  c for two weeks just before planting  bulbs treat well from the recommended fungicide .
Apply basal chemical fertilizer  days before planting  TSP kgha MOP  kgha st top dressing at one week after planting  Urea kgha nd top dressing at flower bud initiation  Urea kgha MOP  kgha.
Plant mother bulbs on raised beds with the spacing of x cm.
Suitable time of planting is early January and the crop should be covered with white polythene at the height of about ft. at the rains and night.
Better to cultivate crops like sunhemp around the crop to attract the insect to increase the pollination.
Mature seed can harvest about  months after planting.
Seed must be well dried unless germination may be loss quickly.
Bulb rot purple blotch and anthracnose are the major diseases in maha season due to unfavorable weather during period.
Control of diseases are similar as in the crop.
Chemical application at flowering must be done carefully  because the insects attraction may be restrict.
Rainy weather condition during December to April cause to fail the seed crop due to high disease incidences.
Therefore it recommend true seed production under poly tunnels in which side opening are allowed to ventilation .
All the agronomic practices are similar to maha season true seed production.
Higher true seed yield can be obtained from the poly tunnels compared to normal crop with low disease incidences.
Medium size mother bulbs which are produced in previous Yala season need to be stored up to May.
These mother bulbs need to plant at early May to mid May with the spacing of  x  cm on raised beds.
Bulb treatment fertilizer and cultural practices are similar to maha crop and not necessary to cover the crop .
Disease incidences are very low compared to maha season and higher seed yield could be obtained compared to maha season.
The crop matures about  days from transplanting.
It is depending on the cultivar and the weather condition.
At the   neck fold stage other plant must be bent or press using plank.
Thereafter water supply must be stopped.
After  days crop can uproot and need to shade dry to improve the quality and storability.
Then bulb can be seen covered with dry scales.
Later the harvest suitable for storage.
Chilli is one of the most important cash crops grown in Sri Lanka.
It has become an essential ingredient in Sri Lankan meals.
Percapita consumption of chilli in the form of dry chilli is estimated kg per annum and the national annual requirement of dry chilli is around  mt.
The annual production of dry chilli is about  Mt.
Therefore an amount of  Mt is imported Year  figures.
Chilli contributes on an average Rs.
million to GDP and creates employment of million work days annually.
Chilli is extensively grown for dry chilli production but part of the crop is harvested as green pods.
The average extent under chilli at present is around  ha of which  is cultivated in maha season
Department of Agriculture has recommended  open pollinated chilli varieties up to now namely MI MI KA Arunalu MI Hot MI Green Galkiriyagama Selection MI waraniya  MICH  MIPC .
The potential yield of these varieties is  tha as green chilli but the national average yields is around tha.
Such low yields are mainly due to high incidences of pest and diseases moisture stress use of inferior quality seeds poor crop management and high input costs.
First local chilli hybrid MICH HY  developed by the Department of Agriculture released in year  with the yield potential of tha as green chilli.
Chilli is cultivated in large scale in the dry zone especially in north central province and the intermediate zone.
At present major chilli growing districts are Anuradhapura Moneragala Ampara Putthalama Vavuniya Kurunegala Hambantota and Mahaweli System H. According to the information received from the chilli farmers in the dry zone the biotic stress condition mainly leaf curl complex LCC is the main reason behind the lower extent of cultivation and the poor yield levels reported in Yala season.
Water shortage and late water issues in Yala season have caused severe incidence of pest out breaks and consequent crop losses.
A tall variety with an erect growth habit which attains a height of    cm depending on the soil type.
It is more suitable for cultivation during the maha season in rainfed uplands but it is susceptible to leaf curl complex LCC and anthracnose and therefore gives comparatively low yields of about    kg ha of dry chillies.
The pods have a moderate pungency and are green becoming red coloured when ripe.
The fruit surface is weakly wrinkled; the calyx is enveloping and the fruit ends are acute and strongly tapered.
MI   has short plant stature with a compact dense canopy having the appearance of a pruned tea bush.
The thin pericarp of the fruits facilitates drying and the pungency of the fruits is higher than that of MI .
This variety does well in all chillie growing areas and can be successfully grown in both the yala and maha seasons.
Flowering starts    days after sowing and the first harvest can be taken in    days after sowing.
From a wellmanaged crop    picks can be harvested at    day intervals up to    days after sowing.
With supplementary irrigation the average yield in yala is about    kg ha and in maha about    kg ha .
The variety also has a moderate level of resistance to the leaf curl complex disease.
The pods are dark green in colour and have weakly wrinkled surface and slightly enveloping calyxes.
The pods have tapering ends and acute apices.
The ripe pods are red in color.
A variety particularly bred for the eastern region where mosaic and leaf curl diseases prevent the cultivation of other varieties as MI  and MI  .
It produces economic yields under low management practices and occasional water stress.
The variety later found to be adapted to other chilli growing regions of the dry zone as well is suited for producing green chilli as much as dry chilli due to its comparatively long cm and wide .
cm pods.
Its thicker .mm fruit wall compared with other varieties results in a longer drying time.
The properly dried chilli have good appearance when new; however the color changes to blackish red within a short period in storage.
For the longer drying time and its susceptibility to the anthracnose disease KA   is more suited to growing in the Yala season than in the Maha season.
At the early stages of growth the plant characteristics of KA   are difficult to tell from that of MI .
Both varieties have compact growth habits.
However at maturity KA   produces a loosely compact uneven canopy with a height of about    cm.
The leaves of KA   are also darker green in color than of MI  .
The average dry chilli yield of KA   under supplementary irrigation is about    kg ha in the Yala season and about    kg ha in the Maha season.
The variety has a high level of tolerance to the leaf curl complex disease in the early stages of the crop.
The chilli Arunalu has an erect plant type which reduces the mutual shading of leaves and allows more light to penetrate through the canopy.
The pods which are erect in position during early stages decline gradually to an intermediate position at full maturity.
The pods mature    days earlier than in MI   and KA   and has a more concentrated fruiting habit which enables about  of the pods to be harvested in    picks.
Pods become bright red and glossy when ripe and highly pungent.
The dry chilli have long shelf life of about  months and the red color does not change or fade easily as in KA   or MI   in storage.
Arunalu has a moderate level of resistance to the anthracnose and LCC diseases.
It is well adapted to all chilli growing areas and can be grown in both the Yala and Maha seasons.
Flowering starts at    days after sowing and the first harvest can be obtained in    days.
The average dry pod yields in the Yala season under irrigation is about    kg ha and in the Maha season under Rainfed conditions is about    kg ha.
Higher yields can be obtained if grown in the Yala season under irrigation with good management.
This variety does well in all chilli growing areas and can be successfully grown in both the yala and Maha seasons.
Flowering starts  days after sowing and the first harvest can be taken in    days after sowing.
From a wellmanaged crop    picks can be harvested at    day intervals up to    days after sowing.
With supplementary irrigation the average yield in Yala is about  kg ha and in Maha about  kg ha.
The variety also has a moderate level of resistance to the leaf curl complex disease.
This variety shows moderate tolerance to anthracnose disease and field tolerance to other fungal diseases such as cercospora and coniophora blight.
It performs well under rain fed condition in Maha season and ability to grow under low soil moisture condition.
Storability and the quality of dry pods color and appearance are also better than that of MI and KA.
This variety can be used for both dry and green chilli production.
Pods are dark green in color and have weakly wrinkled surface and slightly enveloping calyxes.
The pods have tapering ends and acute apices.
The ripe pods are red in color.
This variety perform well in all chilli growing areas and can be successfully grown in both the Yala and Maha seasons.
Under well managed condition plant height increased more than  cm with  cm long pods.
Pods are having dark green shiny surface with high level of pungency.
Under irrigated condition potential yield of this variety is tha as green chilli.
This variety was developed through the evaluation and selection of local landraces and recommended for North Central province in Sri Lanka.
Galkiriyagama selection has small leaves compere to other released varieties with erect growth habit plant which grow up to  cm.
Pods are suitable for green chilli as well as dry chilli with the length of  cm.
Under irrigated condition potential yield of this variety is > tha as green chilli and  tha as dry chilli.
Keeping quality of this variety as dry chilli is very high and can store around  months without color changes.
This variety is very popular among consumers in Low Country Wet Zone in Sri Lanka.
MI Waraniya  can be used as green chilli and as vegetable.
This variety has attractive yellowish green color    cm long pods with moderate level of pungency.
It is highly suitable for home garden and crop can be maintained throughout the year with pruning of mature branches time to time.
Potential yield of MI Waraniya  is    tha as green chilli.
This variety cant be used as dry chilli due to high pericarp thickness.
It shows moderate resistant to Chilli Leaf Cur Complex.
Under well managed condition plant grow up to  cm.
It has a potential yield of more than  tha of green chilli.
The attractive dark green moderate size of pods  cm in length with glossy surface and high pungency are ideal characteristics of this variety for green chilli.
This variety has moderate level of resistant to Chlli Leaf Curl Complex at field level.
This variety was developed through the evaluation and selection of a local landrace and recommended for Eastern province in Sri Lanka.
Conical shape pods with medium size  cm in length and  cm in width and high pungency are the most preferred characteristics of this variety.
This is a dualpurpose variety green chilli and dry chilli which can be cultivated in both Yala and Maha season.
Under irrigated condition potential yield of this variety is > tha as green chilli and tha as dry chilli.
Keeping quality of this variety as dry chilli is very high.
Exploitation of heterosis by developing hybrids is the best way of achieving higher yield and other quality characters.
Most of the chilli growing countries in the world have increased the productivity using hybrid chilli varieties along with hightech agriculture green house drip and sprinkler irrigation.
Sri Lankan farmers prefer to cultivate imported chilli hybrids.
But the price of these hybrid seeds is very high and most of the exotic chilli hybrids are highly susceptible to major pest and diseases in chilli showing less adaptability under local condition.
Therefore it is very important to develop local chilli hybrids adapted to local condition for Sri Lankan farmers.
Therefore Field Crops Research and Development Institute has initiated chilli hybrid development program with the purpose of developing high yielding local chilli hybrids with resistant or tolerant to major biotic and abiotic stresses for Sri Lankan chilli farmers.
Soil conservation is very important to have a sustainable chilli cultivation in the upland irrigated condition.
It is recommended to prepare soil conservation bunds according to the following guidelines.
It is not necessary to stick on to contours but prepare them perpendicular to the slope at equal distances.
Land preparation should be done at the onset of rainfall for efficient utilization of water.
At first deep ploughing is required to a depth of  cm using a disk plough.
It is preferable to use a sub soiler prior to ploughing on uplands.
It will help to make both top and subsoils more loosen.
Sub soiler is recommended to use once in  seasons.
Weeds and crop debris can be incorporated into soil at ploughing.
Ploughing should be always done perpendicular to the slope of the land on uplands.
Weedy lands may require two ploughings to kill weeds.
Then the field must be prepared to a fine tilth without large soil particles using a harrower or appropriate machineries such as rotovators and tine tillers.
It is important to note that chilli plant does not tolerate water lodged conditions so that a drainage system must be prepared to remove excess water efficiently from the field.
The nursery should be maintained carefully to have healthy vigorous seedlings for transplanting.
Nursery bed preparation may be started at late September to early October for Maha Season and early March for Yala season.
Seed requirement of chilli per hectare of land is  kg for OPV and g for hybrids.
In case of OPV thirty nursery beds of m x  cm would be required to plant one hectare.
In case of hybrids fifteen nursery beds of m x  cm would be required to plant one hectare.
A place with good sunlight well drained and free of stones or gravel should be selected for the nursery.
Drains of cm wide should be put around the beds.
Height of the bed should be more than  cm.
Add organic matter preferably compost  kg per each bed.
Make the oil to a fine tilth.
Sterilize beds by burning using paddy husk and paddy straws placed  layers alternatively.
First a straw layer of about  cm and a paddy husk layer on it.
Before placing strawpaddy husk layers wet the soil adequately.
Seeding should be done after burning without so much delays.
In order to prevent virus infections via insect vectors at the initial growth stage of chilli mix seeds with Thiamethoxam  WS at the rate of g in  ml of water for  kg of seeds and keep around  hours.
In addition to that seeds can be mixed with Captan gkg or Thiram .gkg or Thiophanate methyl+Thiram gkg at the time of seeding.
It is important to put seeds in a row.
Spacing between two rows would be cmcm and within the rowcmcm at a depth of cm.
Then place a thin layer of straw mulch.
Apply Thiram g or Thiophanatemethyl g or Thiophanate methyl+Thiram g dissolved in  liters per square meter on to straw.
It is important daily watering until germination which would take about  days.
After germination remove the straw mulch and put in between rows.
Continue watering.
Manual weeding should be done whenever necessary.
A common disease in the nursery is Damping off.
Poor germination wet thin base and breaking of seedlings are identifiable symptoms.
If such a condition was observed remove the infected seedlings with soil and apply one of the following fungicides.
g of  Captan g of Thiram or Thiophanatemethyl g or Thiophanate methyl+Thiram g dissolved in  liter of water and apply to an area of m. Seedlings of  days old  cm height with  leaves and free from pests  diseases are suitable for field establishment.
days prior to establishment limit watering to nursery in order to harden the seedlings.
Field planting under irrigated conditions should be done in April or at least in early May for Yala season and Late October or midNovember for Maha season.
For OPV varieties transplant the seedlings at the spacing of  X  cm with two plants per hill to have a density of  plantsha.
For the local hybrid variety same spacing can be maintained but keeping one plant per hill.
Preferable time for transplanting is in the late afternoon if the environment is sunny.
However shading should be provided with a natural material preferably a larger leaf for few days until the seedlings stably establish in the field.
It is further important that you should avoid upward bending of the tap root when you place in the plating hole.
It is good if you can provide water for several days with a watering can to increase the survival rate to have a good plant stand.
Replanting vacant hills may be required in case the death of seedlings.
Preferable direction for row arrangement is eastwest for efficient utilization of sunlight.
Weeding should be done preferably at    and  weeks after planting.
However depending on the severity of weed infestation you may have to adjust these intervals.
Soil should be loosened at each weeding to have a better root growth.
Application of a mulch would be preferable to control weeds.
Initial Phosphorus and potassium requirement of the crop is supplied by Triple super phosphate TSP and Muriate of potash MOP respectively.
Application rates are kgha of TSP and kgha of MOP.
Basal fertilizer should preferably be applied  days before sowing.
However P and K should be applied based on a soil test as they could be highly available in some areas in order to avoid increase the cost of production unnecessarily and environmental problems.
Incorporate organic manure to soil at land preparation to improve soil health.
The most suitable organic manures are Green manure insitu or ex situ cattle manure poultry manure and quality compost It should be incorporated  days before planting at the rate of tha
The chemical nitrogen fertilizer requirement can be cut down by  when you incorporate Gliricidia leaves at the rate of  tha as a green manure.
This amount can be applied  days before planting and  weeks after planting as equal splits.
Urea at top dressing is applied in  splits at     weeks after planting.
Under irrigated condition kg of ureaha is applied.
MOP at the rate of  kgha should be applied with the third top dressing.
The soils should be sufficiently moist at fertilizing.
Apply fertilizer in between the rows and incorporate into the soil.
Only if the crop shows slow or stunted growth due to abiotic or biotic stresses you may apply a liquid foliar fertilizer containing micro nutrients.
Chilli plant prefer comparatively higher soil moisture levels with a maximum allowable depletion of about   in clay soils.
The chilli crop should be irrigated once in about  days during the first month of the growing period and the rest of the growing period will be fit into weekly irrigation in clay soils.
Irrigation interval may be expanded depending upon the rains.
Bedded basin system or ridge and furrow system in the basin liyadda are more effective in increasing the irrigation efficiency as well as drainage efficiency in the field.
Make sure to have both an irrigation channel and a drainage channel with each basin for the efficient supply and removal of water.
Mulching with paddy straw at the rate of  t ha will decrease water losses through evaporation and help in expanding the irrigation interval.
Mulching will minimize soil erosion and weed emergence significantly.
Further the mulching materials with organic origin will help to enhance the soil organic matter content.
Chilli plants can be transplanted in the leveled flat lands.
Bed or ridge preparation is not compulsory.
However the field should be facilitated with a proper drainage system to remove excess water efficiently under rainy conditions.
Technical type sprinklers are preferred to Blade type sprinklers with respect to the application efficiency.
Technical type sprinklers have a low discharge rate minimizing runoff losses and allowing the top soil to have more water through infiltration.
Irrigation can be practiced daily about  min.
or every other day about  min.
to  hr.
depending upon the existing evaporation rates eg.
longer application durations under higher the evaporation rates.
Morning time operation is recommended to increase the application efficiency and to minimize white fly population in the crop.
Organic matter application and mulching with paddy straw or other organic material will help to reduce the operating time and expand the irrigation interval.
The spacing between two laterals is set as  cm and the planting hill is established at the dripping point.
The drippers are located with a spacing of  cm in the lateral.
It was found that the   of the fertilizer quantities of Urea Triple Super Phosphate and Muriate of Potash are capable of giving similar green chilli yields compared to that with the fertilizer recommendation of the Department of Agriculture for chilli under drip irrigation in RBE soil based on the results of the experiments conducted at the FCRDI Mahailluppallama and GLORDC Angunakolapelessa.
Therefore the following quantities of fertilizer can be applied under drip irrigation for chilli in RBE soil.
The calculated doses of Urea and MOP with respect to each application should be divided into  and apply with each irrigation event.
The fertilizer dose should be dissolved in a bucket of water and put into the fertigation tank after filtering using a cloth to avoid entering of larger particles into the irrigation system that could block the emitters.
If the chilli crop remains productive even after  months then an additional dose of fertilizer Urea can be applied with split applications with each irrigation event as described in earlier chapters until the end of harvesting.
The online emitters can be easily cleaned and replaceable whereas these properties are not found in inline emitters.
Therefore use of the drip irrigation systems with online emitters rather than inline emitters will help in overcoming the problem with blocking of emitters with salts.
It is always advisable to maintain the well in good condition with regular cleaning to avoid the blocking of the irrigation system with soil particles organic debris and algae.
Cleaning of the filter in regular basis will always help in proper functioning of the irrigation system.
Please refer ‘The hand book for diagnosing pests diseases and nutrient deficiencies published by Field Crops Research and Development Institute Mahailluppallama for a detailed description on packages of practices of pest and disease control.
However a brief description on the management of chilli leaf curl complex through an IPM approach is given below.
Harvesting can be started at  days after planting.
If you harvest as green chilli the pods must be fully matured.
Pods should be at least  red for dry chilli.
If you maintain a red chilli cultivation it is preferable to get the first pick as green chilli and subsequently start harvesting as red chilli.
The harvested ripen chilli should be heaped for about  days in shade until they become fully ripened.
Remove immature green or infested pods and then start drying in the open sunlight for about  days.
Place the pods on a material like mats gunny bags or tarpaulin for drying which increases the appearance of pods.
After drying store in sacks.
if dried properly pods can be stored for about  months.
However it would be required to dry again time to time if you store such a long time.
Red onion is important as a condiment vegetable and a medicine in Sri Lanka.
It is a main producing alliaceous crop in addition to the big onion.
National requirement of the red onion is about  Mt year.
But annual production is around  Mt.
Rest of the requirement is imported.
Symptoms can occur in leaves twigs and nuts.
Most of the small plants are susceptible to this disease.
Strong yellow areas around brown circles.
This type of seeds can cause distortion of the leaves.
Trees are weak.
Watermelons which grow in the dry zone regions of the Mahaweli and Mahaweli areas of Sri Lanka are very popular with our farmers.
There is a great demand from the countries of Europe Japan and the Netherlands which is native to our country the Kuukerbitsia spinach plant.
This is a crop of African continents.
Varieties The variety of melon varieties can be divided into two main categories depending on the botanical characteristics.
.
Honey melon  Sweet melon .
Pattakka  Water melon Muscle Mellon Rock Mellon Kantulu etc.
are of category treelike melons.
The melon named Thilini introduced in the Department of Agriculture is very popular in Sri Lanka.
The foreign market is called Sugar Baby.
Nutritional properties The ripe broccoli contains  g of ingredients.
Such a method is available for eating melon products and is widely used as a fruit.
It also eats to soak the water thirst.
Climatic conditions are best suited for cultivation of humidities between  to  of the sun which is recommended as a harvest in the Yal.
Water drops are ideal for sandy soil containing good organic matter.
P. H. The value should be around to.
Masonry soil is not suitable for cultivation because the root of the melon plant is not so strong.
The depth of planting should be reduced in case of moisture in the soil and excessive application of water.
Small sized seed should be planted at low depths and planted with three seeds on each hole.
The time taken to sow the seeds according to the temperature of the soil varies from  to  days.
If the temperature is low the time taken to grow seeds increases.
After germination two leaves are grown more plants should be removed and the removal of plants should be done in two ways.
Planting and disposing of plants on two occasions allows small plants to minimize the damage caused by insects.
Cultivation of wild plants is easier by maintaining germination seeds or using an antiaging herb to plant seedlings prior to planting.
Additionally wild plants are easy to control.
It is also possible to apply a straw layer of four inches thick on the bark before weeding.
Proper growth of the crop helps to keep the soil moisture well increasing the fruit growth and increasing the quality.
Flowering water melon flowers flow into two forms.
The first is the male.
After that the female flowers are blossoming.
They are taken to nuts.
Flowering starts at about  days of planting.
Pollination is caused by insects.
Harvesting can be obtained through a grown cultivation of    metric tons of an acre.
Harvesting should be wellharvested and then harvested.
The Thilini variety is harvested only after the formation of a gray color on the fruit.
It takes  to  days.
Diseases and pests.
Diseases such as sweets underbrush foliar planting stagnation leaf spotting rootborne disease and mosquitoborne diseases can be considered as mosquitoborne diseases.
Crop and soil moisture can be prevented by these diseases and pests.
Blackgram is one of the important grain legumes in the rainfed farming system in dry and intermediate zones of Sri Lanka.
It can be grown under low moisture and fertility conditions.
It has high nutritive value and consist high content of proteins vitamins and minerals.
Presently blackgram is successfully cultivated in the districts of Anuradhapura Polonnaruwa Vavuniya Kurunegala Puttlam Killinochchi Mulathiv Batticaloa and Jaffna.
About  of blackgram crop cultivated during maha season as rainfed uplands crop and rest is grown in yala in paddy fields with supplementary irrigation.
Cultivated extent and production of blackgram vary from year to year with a decreasing trend Table .
Consequently the production is not sufficient for the demand.
The national average yield of blackgram has been stagnating around.
tha over the years and it is far behind the research yield which is about.
tha.
Until early nineties large quantities of blackgram were exported to various countries and no importation were recorded.
Weed control Keep the crop free of weeds in first  weeks from seedling emergence until the canopy is established.
Before application of top dressing weeding should be done.
If there are more weeds regular weeding should be practiced in  weeks interval.
Irrigation Proper soil moisture is important for good and uniform germination first  weeks.
In dry condition water supply should be done  days interval.
After  weeks irrigation should be done  days interval.
When pod maturing time water supply should be cut down.
Sufficient moisture is essential during germination flowering and seed filling stages.
Soybean can be cultivated both in the Dry and Intermediate zones of Sri Lanka but cultivation is limited to Anuradhapura district and System H of the Mahaweli Irrigation scheme and small extent is cultivated in Kurunegala Matale and Polonnaruwa districts.
This crop is cultivated on a limited scale in paddy fields as well as in up lands in both yala dry and maha wet seasons.
Yala season is the main soybean growing season and most of the farmers cultivate under supplementary irrigated conditions in paddy fields whereas in maha it is cultivated under rainfed conditions in uplands.
Soybean is rich in protein and oil.
Protein content of the Soybean can be as high  with the fat reaching even .
Fiber content of the Soybean can be around  .
It has cream colour shiny seed coat with brown colour hilum.
It is similar in seed size to Pb  with a maturity period of  days and an average yield of over tha.
It is tolerant to shattering lodging and good nodulation ability compared to Pb .
In addition it is tolerant to Bacterial pustules Xanthomonas phaseoli var.
sojensis which is one of the major diseases reported in the world.
Variety MISB  has  g of  seed weight while Pb  has  g of  seed weight.
It is an introduction from India and is a selection from variety Nanking.
It shows an erect growth with a plant height of around  cm.
It flowers in  days after planting.
Flowers are purple in colour.
Pods are tan in colour Its medium sized seed have a thousand seed weight of about g. Seed are cream in colour with a buff coloured hilum.
This mature in about  days after planting.
Variety Pb is suitable for rainfall uplands during the maha season as well as with supplementation irrigation during the yala season.
Average yield  kg ha.
Seeds of this varieties Pb has on oil content of  a protein content of .
This variety resembles Pb in many respects.
It exhibits an erect growth with a plant height of  cm.
Flowering occurs in  days after sowing.
The flowers are purple in colour.
Pods are tan in colour when day.
Suds are cream coloured with a buff in coloured hilum.
They are medium sized and g on thousand seed weight.
The varieties matures in about  days after sowing.
A seed yield of    kg ha can be expected from this variety.
Its seeds posses a high protein content of  an oil content of  seeds retain.
Availability above  for a period of about  mounts under ambient humid tropical conditions.
Soybean can be grown in most agroclimatic regions but preferred areas are Dry zone and drier pats of the intermediate Zone.
Almost any soil with a pH of  is adequate but excessive moisture is not acceptable.
Soybean tolerates a degree of poor drainage.
Highlands in maha and welldrained paddy fields in yala are preferable for Soybean cultivation.
It can also be grown on highlands during yala if there is sufficient soil moisture.
One ploughing followed by a harrowing and shape into furrows  ridges.
Ridges should be formed  cm apart to facilitate irrigation.
Seed rate is Kgha.
Irrigation once in every  days during the first month then  days until about  weeks before harvest when irrigation should be stopped.
In flat bed planting flood the beds in ridge and furrow and raised bed systems flood the furrows.
Moisture stress must be avoided during flowering and pod filling.
Seed discoloration varies from pink to dark purple and is often accompanied by cracks in the seed coat.
Infected seed produces diseased seedlings with angular reddish brown stops on leav and often results in seedling death.
Black gram is one of the important grain legumes in the rain fed farming system in dry and intermediate zones of Sri Lanka.
It can be grown under low moisture and fertility conditions.
It has high nutritive value and consist high content of proteins vitamins and minerals.
Presently black gram is successfully cultivated in the districts of Anuradhapura Polonnaruwa Vavuniya Kurunegala Puttlam Killinochchi Mulathiv Batticaloa and Jaffna.
About  of black gram crop cultivated during maha season as rain fed uplands crop and rest is grown in yala in paddy fields with supplementary irrigation.
Cultivated extent and production of black gram vary from year to year with a decreasing trend Table .
Consequently the production is not sufficient for the demand.
The national average yield of black gram has been stagnating around.
tha over the years and it is far behind the research yield which is about.
tha.
Until early nineties large quantities of black gram were exported to various countries and no importation were recorded.
Weed control Keep the crop free of weeds in first  weeks from seedling emergence until the canopy is established.
Before application of top dressing weeding should be done.
If there are more weeds regular weeding should be practiced in  weeks interval.
Irrigation Proper soil moisture is important for good and uniform germination first  weeks.
In dry condition water supply should be done  days interval.
After  weeks irrigation should be done  days interval.
At pod maturing time water supply should be cut down.
Sufficient moisture is essential during germination flowering and seed filling stages.
Harvesting should be done when  of the pods turned black colour.
Cut the plants using sickle and keep one day in the field to dry.
Thresh using thresher or by tractor.
Separate and clean the seeds and dry  days.
Cowpea is an important legume crop in Sri Lanka.
It is an inexpensive source of protein and a hardy crop well adapted to relatively dry environments.
Exhibits semierect growth habit Flowering occurs in about  days after planting.
Flowers are white in colour.
Pods are borne about the canopy.
Seeds are small and pure cream in colour.
Thousand seed weight average around g. Current yield is kg ha.
Variety MI is susceptible to collar rot disease.
Dhawala exhibits a semi erect growth habit.
Flowering occurs in  days after planting.
Flowers are white in colour.
Pods are pendulous and green in colour.
Seed are large and cream coloured with a black eye.
Its thousand seed weight is g. Variety Dhawala is suitable for planting in will drained paddy lands during yala season.
Average yield  kg ha.
Exhibits erect growth habit.
Flowering occurs is about  days after planting.
Flowers are purple in colour.
It posses dark green pigmented long and pendulous pods.
It matures in  days after planting seed are large and speckled grey brown in colour.
Thousand seed weight in about g Variety Bombay cowpea in suitable for cultivation in Maha season in rainfed uplands.
Average yield  kg ha.
Cowpea can be grown on a wide range of soil from predominantly sandy loam to clay ranging from acidic to basic pH .
Sandy to clay loam soil and well drained with a pH of  Cowpea are highly sensitive to water logging.
Groundnut is a crop which cultivated in highlands under rainf ed condition in Maha season and in paddy lands under irrigation during yala season in dry and intermediate zones.
It is grown mainly in Moneragala Kurunegala Ampara Badulla puttalam and Rathnapura districts.
Though groundnut is an oil crop in Sri Lanka it is demanded as snacks and confectionaries.
Gingelly can be grown as a rain fed and irrigated crop in both Maha and Yala.
It requires a warm dry climate with  mm of rainfall including light rains in early stages of growth.
The crop can tolerate a short period of drought but is intolerant of water logging.
Gingelly thrives best on sandy loams but is not exacting in its soil requirements.
It performs reasonably well on poor soils if they are welldrained.
Very sandy and alkaline soils are not suitable.
Sunflower was considered as an ornamental flower until th century after that it was cultivated as an oil seed plant in Russia.
The sunflower is a member of the compositae family.
The commercial varieties cultivated for seed purposes are grouped under Helianthus annuus variety macrocarpus.
The cultivated sunflower contains  somatic chromosomes.
Sunflower is mainly used for the extraction of oil.
Defatted meal is the main by product of sunflower oil extraction and it is rich in protein and certain minerals.
Defatted meal is mostly fed to animals and birds.
The large seeded nonoil seed varieties normally provide feed for birds and also used as whole roasted seeds similar to peanuts.
After dehulling the kernels are sold as confectionery nuts.
Sunflower oil has high level of linoleic acid.
Linoleic acid is required for the cell membrane structure cholesterol transportation in the blood and for prolonged blood clotting.
Sunflower oil helps to reduce the serum cholesterol levels.
The presence of trypsin inhibitor has been observed in sunflower seeds.
However the activity of the inhibitor is extremely low.
The inhibitor is heatliable and inactivated easily.
The chemical composition of sunflower seed is comparable to that of groundnut.
However the composition varies widely due to genetic and environmental factors.
Most of lipids in the seed are present in kernels  followed by embryo  and least in the hull.
The dehulled seeds kernels contain more oil than the whole seed.
Sunflower oil is primarily comprised of palmitic stearic oleic and linoleic acid.
It contains more unsaturated fatty acids than other oil seeds such as soybean peanut and cotton seed.
Fertilizers are necessary for good yields.
Nitrogen the most important nutrient is stored in the main stem and withdrawn when needed.
Phosphate and potassium have an appreciable effect on yield only if sufficient nitrogen is available.
Sunflower is more tolerant to drought than most crops but seed yields are higher under irrigated condition during flower development about  weeks after emergence rapid plant growth utilizes more moisture.
To avoid moisture stress during this stage the crop should be irrigated weekly if rain does not occur that often.
One weeding at  weeks after planting is usually sufficient.
Crop should be kept weed free for the first month after emergence.
Leafeating caterpillar Spodoptera spp is the only major pest damaging the crop during the vegetative phase of the crop.
There are also few minor pests spp occur in the crop.
A fungal disease Phoma is observed when relative humidity is high.
The disease damage the crop severely.
Sunflower is crosspollinated normally by large insects such as honeybees and wasps.
Therefore it is essential to introduce beehives to sunflower cultivation.
Harvest after petals drop but before seeds shatter.
Drying of seeds is the first step in sunflower seed processing.
The moisture content of freshly harvested sunflower seeds may be as high as .
To ensure safe storage the seeds must be dried to less than  moisture.
Sunflower seed is decorticated before the oil is extracted to ensure that the cake is a nutritious animal feed.
Extraction of oil from sunflower seeds or kernels can be done using general equipments and operating conditions used for soybean or other oil seeds.
The extraction of oil from sunflower is done by mechanical extraction prepress solvent extraction and direct solvent extraction methods.
Sunflower oil usually does not require extensive refining as it contains relatively low levels of free fatty acids phopholipids tocopherols pigments and sterols.
In the tropics castor can be grown from sea level to altitudes of about  m. It requires a hot dry climate with annual rainfall of  mm of which ¬ mm is needed during the first  months of crop growth.
Castor is therefore an ideal crop for marginal lands of the Dry Zone where it can be grown under both rain fed and irrigated conditions.
High humidity has an adverse effect on castor and when exposed to temperatures above °C for a continuous period seeds may not develop.
Castor grows best on medium textured deep and well¬ drained fertile soils but can also be grown on most soils with good physical structure.
It cannot tolerate water logging or soil alkalinity.
Rice is the single most important crop occupying  percent .
million ha of the total cultivated area in Sri Lanka.
On average  ha are cultivated during maha and  ha during yala making the average annual extent sown with rice to about  ha.
About million farm families are engaged in paddy cultivation islandwide.
Sri Lanka currently produces million t of rough rice annually and satisfies around  percent of the domestic requirement.
Rice provides  total calorie and  total protein requirement of an average Sri Lankan.
The per capita consumption of rice fluctuates around  kg per year depending on the price of rice bread and wheat flour.
It is projected that the demand for rice will increase at per year and to meet the rice production should grow at the rate of per year.
Increasing the cropping intensity and national average yield are the options available to achieve this production targets.
The current cost of production of rough rice is Rs.
per kg.
The cost of labor farm power and tradable inputs constitutes   and  respectively.
The labor cost has risen at a higher rate than other costs over the last few years.
While the global demand for rice will increase at the production will increase at per annum making the tradable rice volume to be doubled in another  years time.
As a result the rice price would decline at per year.
On the other hand the domestic price of rice on par with Thai A super the cheapest in the world market would be higher by   USD per t than the internationally traded rice.
This situation will place Sri Lanka under increase pressure to produce cheaper and high quality rice in the coming years.
Despite its relatively small aerial extent Sri Lanka exemplifies a variety of climatic conditions depending on the geographical settings of respective locations.
The average annual rainfall of the island varies from about  mm Maha Lewaya Hambantota to over  mm Kenilworth Estate Ginigathhena.
Being located in the low latitudes between  and  N and surrounded by the Indian Ocean Sri Lanka shows very typical maritimetropical temperature conditions.
These conditions are characterized by greater daily than annual temperature ranges and moderate average temperatures in comparison with the more continental tropics.
Temperature conditions in Sri Lanka are also characterized by a significant temperature decrease in the central highlands according to the vertical atmospheric lapse rate.
Sri Lanka has traditionally been generalized in to three climatic zones in terms of Wet Zone in the southwestern region including central hill country and Dry Zone covering predominantly northern and eastern part of the country being separated by an Intermediate zone skirting the central hills except in the south and the west Map .
In differentiating aforesaid three climatic zones rainfall contribution of southwest monsoon rains soils land use and vegetation have been widely used.
The Wet zone receives relatively high mean annual rainfall over  mm without pronounced dry periods.
The Dry zone receives a mean annual rainfall of less than  mm with a distinct dry season from May to September.
The Intermediate zone receives a mean annual rainfall between  to  mm with a short and less prominent dry season.
As low temperature is an important climatic factor affecting plant growth in the Wet and Intermediate zones of Sri Lanka a subdivision based on the altitude takes into account the temperature limitations in these two climatic regions.
In this delineation the Lowcountry is demarcated as the land below  m in elevation and the Midcountry with elevation between    m while the Upcountry is the land above  m elevation Map .
Both Wet and Intermediate zones spread across all three categories of elevation while the Dry zone is confined to the Lowcountry resulting seven agroclimatic zones covering the entire island Map .
These seven agroclimatic zones have further subdivided into AgroEcological Regions AER with a total of  AERs covering the entire island Map .
The delineation of AER boundaries of Sri Lanka has been based on the rainfall regime terrain characteristics predominant soil type land use and vegetation so that each AER represents an uniform agroclimate soils and terrain conditions and as such would support a particular farming system where certain range of crops and farming practices find their best expression.
Detailed studies on climatology of Sri Lanka has identified that climatic year or hydrological year of the island begins in March and not in January so that seasonal weather rhythm or more specifically the rainfall seasons ranges from March to February.
These rainfall seasons do not bring homogeneous rainfall regimes over the whole island and it is the main cause to exhibit such a high agroecological diversity of the country despite its relatively small aerial extent.
Out of these four rainfall seasons two consecutive rainy seasons make up the major growing seasons of Sri Lanka namely Yala and Maha seasons.
Generally Yala season is the combination of FIM and SWM rains.
However since SWM rains are not effective over the Dry zone it is only the FIM rains that fall during the Yala season in the Dry zone from mid March to early May.
Being effective only for two months the Yala season is considered as the minor growing season of the Dry zone.
The major growing season of the whole country Maha begins with arrival of SIM rains in Mid SeptemberOctober and continues up to late JanuaryFebruary with the NEM rains.
Rice is grown under more diverse environmental conditions than any other major food crop in the world and the situation remains as the same in Sri Lanka too.
Except in almost all AERs in the Up country Wet and Intermediate zones where minimum temperature at nighttime is limiting paddy is the most common land use in valley bottoms in the all other AERs of the country.
Solar radiation is not a limiting factor for rice growth in almost all rice growing regions of Sri Lanka.
However when all other conditions such as water nutrients and temperature are nonlimiting the intensity of sunlight may determine the yield level depending on the location and season.
For example in the Wet zone solar radiation may limit the rice yield during Yala season due to high cloud cover arising from the southwest monsoonal circulation whereas a similar situation could expect in the Dry zone during Maha season due to overcast conditions that may result due to weather systems formed in the Bay of Bengal and northeast monsoonal circulation.
This agroclimatic region has been subdivided in to five AERs Map  where rice is the main land use in inland valleys and flood plains.
The expected annual rainfall at the  probability level in this region ranges from  to  mm depending on the agroecological region Table .
Its average maximum temperature ranges from  to  C. The highest values are being recorded during the period of late February to early May.
The average minimum temperature is ranged from  to  C where the lowest values are generally observed during the period of December to February the winter months of the island.
The day time relative humidity is generally ranged from  to  percent where as nighttime values may reach even up to  per cent at anytime of the year.
Even though this agroclimatic region has been subdivided in to six AERs Map  rice is predominantly found only in four AERs Table .
The two AERs located in higher elevations namely WMa and WMb are not suitable for rice as cool injuries are likely to occur.
The expected annual rainfall at the  probability level in this region ranges from  to  mm depending on the agroecological region.
Its average maximum temperature ranges from  to  C. The highest values are being recorded during the period of late February to early May.
The average minimum temperature is ranged from  to  C where the lowest values are generally observed during the period of December to February the winter months of the island.
The further low values of night temperature are likely to experience in higher elevations of the region i.e.
WMa and WMb regions.
The day time relative humidity is generally ranged from  to  percent where as nighttime values may range from  to  per cent.
This agroclimatic region has been subdivided in to four AERs Map  and rice is hardly found in this region.
As the elevation of this agroclimatic region is well above the  m low temperature has become a limiting factor for growth of rice plants.
This agroclimatic region has been subdivided in to five AERs Map  where rice is the predominant land use in valley bottoms and terraced upland slopes in some areas.
The expected annual rainfall at the  probability level in this region ranges from  to  mm depending on the agroecological region.
Its average maximum temperature ranges from  to  C. The highest values are being recorded during the period of late February to early May.
The average minimum temperature is ranged from  to  C where the lowest values are generally observed during the period of December to February a common phenomenon for the entire island.
The day time relative humidity is generally ranged from  to  percent where as nighttime values may reach even up to  per cent especially during winter months of the year.
Although this agroclimatic region has been subdivided in to eight AERs Map  rice is being cultivated only in five AERs Table .
In these AERs rice is the major land use in valley bottoms and terraced slopes at least in one season out of two seasons in a year.
In the other season farmers may switch in to vegetable cultivation depending on the land suitability.
The expected annual rainfall at the  probability level in this region ranges from  to  mm depending on the agroecological region.
Its average maximum temperature ranges from  to C. The highest values are being recorded during the period of late March to early May.
The average minimum temperature is ranged from  to  C where the lowest values are generally observed during the period of December to February.
The day time relative humidity is generally ranged from  to  percent where as nighttime values are generally around  to  per cent.
Although this agroclimatic region has been subdivided in to seven AERs rice is being cultivated only in two AERs due to limitation of the temperature regime in the rest of AERs owing to their relatively higher elevations.
In those two AERs rice may be the major land use in valley bottoms during minor rainy season Yala.
In the other season Maha farmers may switch in to high value temperate vegetable crops especially for potato to harness the potential of low temperature regime prevailing in these regions.
The expected annual rainfall at the  probability level in those two regions ranges from  to .
Its average maximum temperature ranges from  to C. The highest values are being recorded during the period of late March to September.
During the said period high winds that blow from the southwest direction is a common weather phenomenon to experience in this region.
The average minimum temperature is ranged from  to  C where the lowest values are generally observed during the period of December to March.
Hence low temperature injuries in rice plants could be a recurrent problem if rice is grown in those regions during the major rainy season Maha season.
Relative humidity during day time in this agroclimatic region is generally ranged from  to  percent where as nighttime values may reach even up to  per cent especially during winter months of the year.
This agroclimatic region is the countrys driest part and it has been subdivided in to  AERs.
Even though water is a limiting factor in this part of the country for year round crop production transbasin diversion of some rivers of Wet and Intermediate zones and large number of tanks that were built during ancient times have made it possible to cultivate lowlands in to rice or rice based cropping systems.
Out of  AERs in this region rice is the predominant agricultural land use in  AERs except in DL AER Table  the Oxisol belt which spreads from northwestern coastal region to northern peninsular Map .
The expected annual rainfall at the  probability level in this region ranges from  to  mm depending on the agroecological region.
In some AERs monthly rainfall distribution depicts a bimodal pattern where as AERs found in the northeastern and eastern parts of the Dry zone shows a unimodal monthly rainfall distribution.
Hence unless irrigation water is supplied cultivation of rice in lowland in those regions is possible only during the major rainy season Maha season.
When the Wet zone of Sri Lanka experiences Southwest monsoon rains the same monsoonal wind blows over the Dry zone as a warm and dry wind a Fhn like wind locally known as Yal Hulang Wesak hulang or Kachchan.
Hence crop water requirement during this period May to September Yala season is very much higher than that of the other times of the year Maha season.
The general wind speed of the Dry zone is   kmhr.
However during said period it may reach even   kmhr.
The average maximum temperature in the Dry zone ranges from  to  C depending on the AER.
The highest values are being recorded during the period of late February to late September irrespective of the location.
Thus high temperature injuries are being experienced in rice grown during Yala season in the Dry zone commonly known as the Ehela Pussa.
Continuous weather observations have shown that it is becoming a more and more common feature in rice cultivation during recent times and it could be a repercussion of global warming.
The average minimum temperature is ranged from  to  C where the lowest values are generally observed during the period of December to February a common phenomenon for the entire island.
However further low nighttime temperatures are experienced during winter months in the northern peninsular of the island due to the influence of the huge land mass of the Indian subcontinent making it possible to grow potato.
However rice is hardly grown in this region due to some other edaphic limitations.
The day time relative humidity in the Dry zone is generally ranged from  to  percent where as nighttime values may reach even up to  per cent especially during winter months of the year.
Land preparation is defined as the physical preparation of soil to develop edaphic environment conducive for optimum plant growth after seed or seedling establishment .
It also facilitates root growth mixing of soil layers to increase availability of residual fertilizer incorporation of residue to minimize weed growth increasing soil organic matter content and reduce percolation losses of water and nutrient.
Paddy land preparation is basically divided into two as wet and dry land preparation.
In wet land preparation the rice fields are first flooded with water before tillage while in dry land preparation the soil is not flooded before tillage .
The conventional land preparation practiced by majority of Sri Lankan rice farmers typically involves three steps namely primary secondary and tertiary tillage.
Draft buffalo four or two wheel tractor or a rotovator are used as power sources in land preparation.
Initial plowing is done to deepen the rhizosphere and to incooperate weeds and crop residues to soil.
The moisture content of the soil determine the time of tillage.
The tillage is done when the soil has the correct water contact and is friable for plowing or rotovating and harrowing where soil moisture content reduce  of the field capacity.
Since continuous cropping and use of inproper plowing equipment have created a sandy shallow root zone plowing to a depth of about  cm is recommended.
Moldboard plough fixed to four or two wheel tractors disc plough animal and manual power are used for this operation.
Soil condition amount of weeds and crop residue and farmers requirement determine the number of tillage to be done and the type of plough to be used.
If the time period between tillage and crop establishment is extended tillage should be repeated to prevent soil compaction.
Moldboard plough is used for deep plowing and disc or conventional plough is used for medium tillage.
Deep plowing is important to control perennial weeds like Atawara Panicum repens Linn.
and Purple nutsedge  Kaladuru Cyprus rotandus L. Primary tillage is done  days before the secondary tillage.
The objective of secondary tillage is to break the big clumps of soil remained after secondary tillage into small clumps and to incooperate the weeds germinated late and remaining crop residues to the soil.
This is done across to the direction of primary tillage by using two wheel tractor or animals.
Secondary tillage involves clearing  repairing and replastering of bunts and done  days before crop establishment.
This involves pudlling and leveling.
Tillage of flooded soil is referred to as puddling.
Soil puddling destroys soil structure which reduces percolation rates and loss of water.
This results low porosity and permeability and formation of a soil plow pan.
During this operation basal fertilizer is added and soil is puddled several times until the fertilizer is mixed to the soil well.
Puddling is very efficient in clay soils that form deep cracks penetrating the plow pan at about  to  cm soil depth during the period of soil drying before land preparation.
Although puddling reduces percolation rates of the soil the action of puddling itself consumes water.
Puddling is followed by leveling to have a good seedbed suited for plant growth.
A wellleveled field is a prerequisite for good water and crop management.
When field is not level water may stagnate in the depressions whereas higher parts may fall dry.
This results uneven crop emergence early growth fertilizer distribution and possibly additional weeds.
Effective land leveling will improve crop establishment and care reduce the time and water required to irrigate the field and ensure more uniform distribution of water in the field.
The Field is then kept for one day before sowing or planting until fine clay particles migrate downward and fill up the cracks and pores in the plow pan.
It takes around  weeks to complete the and preparation by conventional manner while the labor consumption is also high.
The main limiting factor is the consumption of large amount of water.
It is estimated that conventional land preparation consumes  of the total water requirement of the crop.
Due to these reasons farmers in some rice growing areas of Sri Lanka shift from conventional land preparation to non puddle land preparation methods such as minimum or zero tillage.
In minimum tillage practice land preparation is kept to the minimum necessary for crop establishment and growth thereby reducing time labor and fuel costs and damage to soil structure.
Primary tillage or row tillage is done and crop residues are kept in between rows.
The bunds are not cleaned and weed control is done regularly by using herbicides.
To compensate poor germination and seed lost by birds and rodents kgha of seed paddy is used either as in dry or wet basis.
No Land preparation is practiced while pre emergent herbicides are used to control weeds before sowing.
The seed paddy soaked in water for  hours and incubated with  hours are broadcasted to the moisten soil on the onset of rain.
A higher seed rate  kha iis used to maintain preferred pant density.
Seven to ten days after germination fields are saturated with water and selected herbicides are used to control weeds later on.
Crop establishment can be defined as the establishment of seeds or seedlings in the field I order to grow it as a crop.
Method of establishment of rice can be broadly divided into direct sowing of pre germinated or ungerminated seeds and transplanting of seedlings.
This method is becoming more popular among rice farmer as it is economical than transplanting.
The yields are also comparable with transplanted rice if crop is properly managed.
Direct seeding methods could be divided into Wet seedling and Dry seeding.
In Wet seeding pregerminated seeds are broadcasted into puddled and leveled field which are free from standing water.
At the time of puddling basal fertilizer mixture is added.
After germination of seed seedling desiccation due to water stress is avoided by intermittent wetting of the field.
When the seedlings are of about  cm tall about a week after sowing water is impounded to prevent germination of weeds and desiccation of the seedlings.
The stand establishment by this method varies with the quality of land preparation weed competition water management and the rainfall during the initial period after sowing.
Row seeding of germinated seeds could also be done but it is practiced in limited scale because of the cost and the difficulty in obtaining implements.
This method of sowing will help controlling weeds especially mechanical control and management of the crop.
This system will also help to maintain optimum density of seedlings whereas random broadcasting often lead to low or high seedling density.
Selection of a suitable variety for direct seeding is important as there is a genotypic variability in germination under submerged conditions.
However if field can be maintained at or below field capacity for about  days focus should be on varieties which process good initial seedling vigor.
Seedling vigor is mainly determined by the seed quality and other cultural practices.
Stand establishment is often poor with direct seeding because of poor quality seed paddy poor land preparation weed competition poor water management unfavorable environmental conditions and physical damages.
Therefore seed rates should be adjusted accordingly to have the desired panicle number.
Components of yield could be divided into panicle number seeds per panicle and seed weight.
Panicle number is mostly determined by the tillering ability of a variety which is a function of the number of seedlings per unit area.
In general a healthy crop of new improved rice variety under optimum condition should bear about  panicles per sq.
meter.
Thus seed rate should be adjusted accordingly to meet this requirement.
A variety with a seed weight of about g seeds medium grain size have a seed rate of about  kgha.
Seed rate decreases with seed weight thus small grain type varieties Samba have lesser seed rates  kgha.
Decreasing seed rate would increase unproductive tillering.
Increasing seed rate would also increase density which increases unhealthy seedlings with small panicles due to competition for resources and increase susceptibility to pest and diseases.
A uniform plant density can be maintained by uprooting high density seedlings thinning out and transplanting them in places having low plant density.
Seeds can also be sown as ungerminated dry seeds in Kakulan or Manawari sowing.
In this method dry seeds are sown to dry soil either in rows or in random.
Seed rate generally vary with the severity of the environment and the type of physical damages to the seeds.
Depending on the level of weed infestation in dry seeded rice the seed rate also varies from  kgha to  kgha.
However if conditions for rice seed germination and subsequent operations are favorable the seed rate for dry seeding could be reduced.
Water seeding is newly introduced method of establishment in which  hours soaked and  hours incubated seed paddy is broadcasted to puddle soil with standing water.
The seeds are slowly get deposited with a thin layer of mud and excess water is removed a day after the establishment.
This method helps to protect the sown seed paddy from birds and to protect from lodging because of the deep root system developed.
The  days old seedlings with a ball of mud raised in parachute trays are sown uniformly throughout the puddle and leveled field.
The seed paddy requirement is  kgha.
Since the root system is not damaged there is no transplanting shock and seedlings are quickly established in the field.
The seedling density is maintained m for maximum yield.
This method saves seed paddy and labor cost for  than that of in transplanting.
It also produces high number of tillers while the harvest can be obtained  days before.
The extent of transplanted rice is decreasing due to the scarcity of labor and other resources and the decrease cultivation of ½ month rice varieties.
Transplanting will also decrease rice plants ability to withstand moisture stress.
Transplanting is generally recommended for    ½ month varieties and if ½ or  month variety is transplanted it should be planted with young  days old seedlings.
The physical and biochemical factors would set a minimum and maximum age for a particular nursery.
Minimum age of a seedling for transplanting would be about  days.
For a three month age crop seedling age should not increased beyond  days while for a    ½ month crop it is about  days.
Seedling age of a dapog nursery should not exceed  days.
Transplanting is also recommended when land preparation is not up to the standard and water management is poor.
It has been reported that transplanting increase the yield of long age varieties when compared with broadcasting because transplanting reduces the excessive build up of vegetative biomass due to transplanting shock.
When row transplanting is practiced spacing between hills vary with the age of the variety.
A spacing of  x  cm and x cm is recommended for a long age  ½month and short age  ½ month varieties.
The spacing of a ½ month variety is x cm.
A hill should be planted with  healthy seedlings.
Row transplanting is done either by hand or by using a transplanting machine.
Ability to maintain an optimum plant density ability to use weeder and easy application of fertilizer and chemicals are the advantages of row transplanting.
If random transplanting is practiced hill density of about  seedlings m for  ½ month varieties and  seedlings m for  ½ month varieties is optimum.
For transplanted rice seedling age is the major factor in determining yield.
Transplanting shock which is the set back of growth due to uprooting and replanting of seedling increases with the increase age of seedling and with decrease age of the variety.
In general the effect of transplanting on yield increases with decreasing age.
Seedling age in calendar days also vary with the environmental condition and the type of nursery.
The tiller numbers that can be obtained from transplanted rice get retard if transplanting depth exceeds cm since the internodes are underneath of the soil.
In order to obtain a maximum number of tillers transplanting at a depth of  cm is recommended.
Raising seedlings for transplanting could be done in either wet bed dapog or dry bed methods.
For mechanical transplanting seedling boxes could be used.
The choice of a particular nursery system depends on the availability of water labor land and agricultural implements.
Success in raising healthy seedlings depends on constant supervision of the seed bed and constant supervision.
Wet seed bed nursery is mainly used in areas where water is adequate for nursery establishment.
Before sowing of germinated seeds soil is thoroughly puddled and leveled and construct drainage canals between seed beds for proper removal of water.
Addition of organic manure decomposed and small amount of inorganic fertilizer as basal dressing will increase easiness of uprooting of seedlings and seedling vigor.
Total seed bed area is about  of the area to be transplanted and requires about  kg of seed paddy per ha.
Seed rate is adjusted for small grain varieties.
Nursery site is kept without shade and with adequate irrigation and drainage facilities.
Quality rice seeds is soaked in clean water for a minimum period of  hours and incubate in a warm dry place for about  hours.
Sprouted seed is then broadcasted uniformly on the nursery bed.
Before seeding the nursery is drained completely.
Thereafter nursery is maintained in moist condition for about  days.
Once the seedlings are established the nursery is impounded with water and raised the level gradually.
The best stage of transplanting seedling is about  days.
Nursery is maintained free from weeds any pest or disease incidence and nutrient deficiencies.
If such conditions occur it must be treated at the nursery level.
The advantages of wetbed nursery are rapid growth and easy uprooting of seedlings.
This system of nurseries are prepared in dry soil conditions.
Seed beds of convenient dimensions are prepared by raising the soil to a height of about  cm.
A thin layer of half burnt paddy husk could be distributed on the nursery bed mainly to facilitate uprooting.
In this method dry or in just sprouted seeds are sown in rows which are about cm apart.
Sowing of seeds could also be done as random but random sowing should be discouraged as the weed control is difficult.
The site is kept free of shade and with adequate irrigation facilities.
Nursery area should be about  of area to be transplanted.
Seed rate is higher than for wetbed about  kgha as the germination could be lower.
Uprooting of seedlings is done between    days after germination.
Nursery is needed to maintain without any moisture stress.
A basal fertilizer mixture could be applied and incorporated between rows if the soil nutrient supply is low.
The advantage of this method is that seedlings are short and strong has longer root system than wet bed and can be raised even during heavy rains which are not possible with wet bed.
However roots may get damaged during pulling.
Seedlings of upland nurseries may also get infected with blast and are more prone to pests such as rodents etc.
Dapog nurseries could be located anywhere on a flat surface.
However if low land paddy field is used water supplycontrol should be very reliable.
Area needed is about  of the transplantable land which is much smaller than conventional nurseries.
Seed rate is about  kgha.
Seed bed is leveled and make the centre slightly higher than the edges to permit water to drain off the surface.
The surface is covered with either banana leaves with the mid rib removed poly ethylene sheets or any flexible material to prevent seedling roots penetrating to the bottom soil layer.
Cemented floors can also be used for this purpose.
The seed bed is covered with about  layer burnt paddy husk or compost.
Pregerminated seeds are sown uniformly on the seed bed to a thickness of  seeds.
The germinating seeds are splashed with water and pressed down by hand or with a wooden flat board in the morning and afternoon up to  days to prevent uneven growth.
Too much watering is prevented.
More frequent irrigation is necessary if seed were sown without the bedding.
The nursery can be transplanted in  days after germination of seeds.
The advantage of the dapog over wetdry bed nursery is that less area is needed and the cost of uprooting of seedling is minimal.
However since the seedlings are small transplanting is difficult.
Very young seedlings from dapog nurseries are subjected to less transplanting shock than of other nurseries thus these seedlings are more suitable for short aged varieties.
Other disadvantage of dapog seedling was the field should be very well leveled and free of water since the seedlings are very short.
For mechanical transplanting nurseries should be aboutm wide may vary with the type of transplanter.
A sheet of polythene is placed on the leveled nursery bed and a compost layer to a height of  cm is placed on it.
Sprouted seeds are then sown to a density of  gm.
Irrigation is done to prevent water stress.
Seedlings are ready for transplanting after  days.
The parachute nursery is established in parachute trays in a size of  x  x cm length x width x height.
About  trays consisted with  small hills and are required to cultivate one hectare.
The nursery can be established as a drybed or a wetbed nursery.
A flat land having sufficient sunlight and accessibility to water supply is used to established a drybed nursery.
The trays filled with ¾ of its hills with clay are placed in two rows.
Either dry or  hours soaked and  hours incubated seeds are placed  seedshill and then a thin layer of soil is spread on it.
If needed water is added and then the trays are covered with coconut or banana leaves to protect them from rain and also to conserve moisture.
A part of the field can be used to prepare a wetbed parachute nursery.
The size of a nursery is about cm height and cm width with an appropriate length.
It should be kept for  days before the trays are placed and the seeds are placed in the same manner as drybed nursery.
The coconut or banana leaves are removed after  days and water is added if needed.
The  days old seedlings can be used for sowing .The seed requirement is  kgha.
Less cost for seedpaddy and labor and the ability to supply fertilizer into the nursery are the advantages of parachute nursery.
Rice Orysa sativa L is cultivated either as a rain fed or as a supplementary or fully irrigated crop.
The system of rice cultivation mainly depends on the available rainfall and its distribution.
In general except in semi arid areas where rice cultivation is marginal average rainfall in rice growing areas of Sri Lanka can meet at least part of the water requirement for a rice crop during it cropping season.
Thus in strict terms there is no fully irrigated rice cultivation in Sri Lanka.
Rice is a semi aquatic plant and does not need standing water for a successful rice crop.
However uncertainty of water supply either through irrigation or rain and to reduce weed infestation rice is always cultivated as a crop with standing water.
Response of the rice plant to water stress is varied with its growth stage and other agronomic practices.
Direct sown rice crop is less prone to drought than a transplanted crop.
Highest water use is during the preparation of land thus land preparation with minimum timing and maximum use of rain water at the correct time of the season is recommended.
Stress has been defined as any environmental factor capable of inducing a potentially injurious strain in plants.
Water is a major constituent of tissue a reagent in chemical reaction a solvent for and mode of translocation for metabolites and minerals within plant and is essential for cell enlargement through increasing turgor pressure.
With the occurrence of water deficits many of the physiological processes associated with growth are affected and under severe deficits death of plants may result.
The effect of water stress may vary with the variety degree and duration of water stress and the growth stage of the rice crop.
Water requirement is low at the seedling stage.
Unless there is severe water stress the effect during this stage could be recovered.
Water stress during vegetative stage reduces plant height tiller number and leaf area.
However the effect during this stage is varied with the severity of stress and age of the crop.
Long duration varieties cause less yield damage than short duration varieties as long vegetative period could help the plant to recover when water stress is relieved.
Leaf expansion during vegetative stage is very sensitive to water stress.
Cell enlargement requires turgor to extend the cell wall and a gradient in water potential to bring water into the enlarging cell.
Thus water stress decreases leaf area which reduces the intercepted solar radiation.
Rice leaves in general have a very high transpiration rate thus under high radiation levels rice plant may suffer due to mid day wilting.
Rice plant can transpire its potential rate even when soil moisture was around field capacity.
Therefore maintaining saturated water regime through the crop duration is best for saving water and increasing grain yield.
However if the weed pressure is high maintaining standing water until the closure of the canopy and then maintaining saturated soil conditions could increase water saving without reduction in yield.
Soil cracking should be prevented to reduce percolation during subsequent irrigation.
In general rice plant uses less than  of the water absorbed through roots from the soil.
The rest is lost through transpiration which helps to maintain leaf energy balance of the crop.
Decrease leaf water potential closes stomata and decrease transpiration which in turn increase leaf temperature.
Stomatal closure could be due to the accumulation of Abscisic acid which is a drought tolerant mechanism.
Even though closure of stomates improves water use efficiency under water stress conditions this decreases carbon assimilation due to reduction in physical transfer of CO molecule and increase leaf temperature reduces the biochemical processes.
Decrease solubility of CO may also reduce CO assimilation.
Translocation of assimilates could also decrease under desiccating conditions due to reduction is source and sink capacity and decrease water potential.
There is a marked genotypic variation in rooting pattern in rice in response to water stress.
Drought resistant varieties possess deep and thick roots in contrast to this and shallow roots.
Thick roots in rice are positively correlated with xylem vessel area are vital to the conductance of water from soil to the upper parts of the plant to meet the evaporative demand.
It has also observed that water stress reduces the uptake of nutrients which could be due to the fact that most of the elements are absorbed via roots through passive diffusion.
Direct seeded rice are more tolerant to water stress than transplanted rice which could be due to its superior root system.
Increase N nutrition increases the susceptibility of the rice plant to water stress.
Rice is most susceptible to water stress during reproductive stage.
Water stress at or before PI reduces panicle number most but all stresses regardless of crop stage or duration significantly reduce panicle number.
Water stress after PI reduces the potential spikelet number.
Water stress at heading reduces rate of exertion of the panicle.
Anthesis and ripening stages are the most sensitive stage for water stress.
Water stress during anthesis increased unfilled spiklets.
Spikelet sterility decreases with decrease leaf water potential during meiotic stage of pollen development.
Mild stress affect sink more than source whereas severe stress affects both.
Stress during grain filling decrease translocation of assimilates to the grain which decreases grain weight and increase empty grains.
Increase canopy temperature above C due to water stress linearly increase relative spikelet sterility.
The ability of a plant to grow satisfactorily when exposed to periods of water stress is called drought resistance.
Mechanism of drought resistance in rice could be either tolerance avoidance escape or recovery.
The True drought avoiding plants could posses mechanisms to maintain favourable water status either by conserving water or by their ability to supply water to above ground organs even during drought stress.
Root depth is a plant trait most strongly related to drought avoidance in upland rice culture which is an avoidance mechanism.
Rice plant that can escape or evade drought through the adjustment of the life cycle is also an important trait for Drought resistance.
Leaf rolling or reduced leaf area stomatal closure and delayed flowering under water stress conditions compared to well watered condition could be escape mechanisms.
Tolerance implies the plant tissues to withstand water stress.
The degree of tolerance in rice vary among varieties and among growth stages within a variety.
Osmorogulation in certain varieties of rice is a tolerance mechanism.
Recovery of a rice plant after relieving drought stress is varied with the variety the severity of stress and growth stage.
Water requirement for a successful rice crop varies with the method of land preparation method of crop establishment and duration of the rice crop.
It also varies with the soil environmental conditions and the management of the subsequent rice crop.
Water is lost through evaporation E from free water surface transpiration T from the crop seepage and percolation of the soil bunt leakages and runoff from the field.
Seepage and percolation vary with the edaphic environment which could be partially controlled through proper management.
However evapotranspiration is determined mainly by the vapor pressure deficit and the canopy size which is beyond the control of a farmer.
Bund leakages and runoff from the field is totally under the farmers control.
Therefore the main determinants of water requirement WR are evapotranspiration seepage and percolation S  P rates which could be summarized as follows.
Water requirement for land preparation could be minimal with dry land preparation which is popularly known as Kekulan or Manawary system of cultivation which needs little or no supplementary moisture.
However majority of rice is cultivated as lowland crop.
The duration of land preparation mainly determine the amount of water required which is dependent on the type of land class and the weed infestation.
Water requirement for lowland land preparation is determine by the amount required for soil soaking losses during operations and maintaining standing water in the field.
Water requirement for soaking the land depends on the initial soil moisture content and surface conditions of the land and soil type.
The requirement may vary from  mm.
to  mm.
of water as there may be losses through cracks and other ways.
After first ploughing field is inundated with water to keep the soil and weeds under water which facilitates decomposition.
During the period when standing water is maintained on the surface water is lost through evaporation seepage and percolation.
Average rate of evaporation in a sunny day in the Dry Zone during Maha is about mm and during Yala is about  mm.
Seepage and percolation rates are highly variable depending on the soil type porosity topography and depth to the water table.
Reddish Brown Earth RBE soil has an average S  P rate of  mmday and Low Humic Gley LHG soils it is around  mmday.
Therefore to maintain standing water or to keep the soil saturated water should be supplied to meet the S P and evaporation requirements.
Thus the water requirement increases with the increase in duration of land preparation.
A minimum period of two weeks is required for conventional method of land preparation.
Water is lost from a rice field mainly through evapotranspiration seepage percolation surface runoff  bund leakages which could vary depending on crop environment and the field management factors.
Evapotranspiration from a rice crop canopy is a function of the size of the crop leaf area water availability and the environmental conditions.
Evapotranspiration increases with increase leaf area.
Variation in rice crop ET during its growth is shown in fig.
.
Evapotranspiration is low at early stages of crop growth and achieve maximum towards heading.
Hence the frequency of irrigation should increase accordingly towards flowering to meet the increasing demand for water.
Rates of seepage and percolation when compared with ET which is relatively stable in a given period within a given agroecological region with uniform climate vary very much from place to place.
Seepage and percolation rates are mainly govern by the profile characteristics and topography and are much greater in sandy than clay soils.
It increases with increase depth of standing water.
The rate of S  P is about  mmday in well drained and  mmday in poorly drained soils.
In general RBE soils have greater S  P compared to LHG.
Further dry land preparation increases S  P rates due to increase porosity hence puddling decrease S  P by clogging the pores and forming a hardpan below the plough layer.
Poorly constructed bunds and crab holes increase seepage.
Total water requirement for lowland rice increases with the age of rice crop and could be summarized as follows.
Water requirement WR per season = Sum of daily ET + Sum of daily S  P As suggested earlier S  P rates are highly variable between locations thus WR varies accordingly.
Experiments conducted under controlled situations at Agriculture Research Station Mahailluppallama suggest the following total WR for the Maha season.
Water loss through ET S  P should be supplemented by either natural means such as rain and seepage from adjoining plots or through irrigation.
If an average of  mm of water is lost per day by ET and about    mmday by seepage and percolation from poorly drained and well drained soils respectively a total of  to  mm of water is lost per day from a low land rice field.
If irrigation water could be supplied to a depth of about cm per issue irrigation frequency should be maintained at  to  days interval.
When initial water height in the field is lower frequent irrigation is needed.
However in this system of irrigation field will be kept without standing water towards later days after irrigation.
Water for rice culture in Sri Lanka is received through rainfall or through irrigation.
In areas where rain fall distribution during the season is satisfactory to meet the crop water requirement of rice culture crop is raised completely as rainfed crop.
In this case crop depends on direct rainfall to the field and seepage and run off from surrounding areas.
There is no properly constructed system of channels for directing of distribution of water.
Dykes are constructed to retain water in the field and they are maintained well to prevent water leakages.
In areas where rainfall is not assured to supply water requirement of the crop supplementary irrigation is provided through distributory channel systems from tanks and anicuts.
These irrigation networks essentially designed for rice culture are divided into two main categories based on command area namely  Minor irrigation system  Major irrigation system by the Irrigation Department.
The minor irrigation systems are the systems where command and area is less than  ha.
Both tank and anicut systems are included.
The major irrigation systems are with command areas greater than  ha.
They also include both tanks reservoir and anicut systems.
Minor irrigation systems These systems come within the justification of Agrarian services department.
Since the command area is comparatively smaller and distributory channelled lengths are shorter better regulation can be expected.
The water availability in these systems depends on the catchment area rainfall tank capacity and the size of command area.
Major irrigation systems came within the authority of either the Irrigation Department of Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka.
The tanks and streams which are used for anicut systems depend on their own catchments for water in many systems.
However some tanks are benefitted by water diverted to them from other catchment through transbasin channels.
The water supply under these reservoirs is more assured than the tanks which depend on their own catchments.
The distributor channeled systems in these systems are better equipped with control structures than in the minor irrigation schemes.
Hence somewhat controlled water management practices have been introduced into these systems.
Water is issued mostly on a pre scheduled rotation in major tank systems.
Salinity Development in Paddy fields Wrong water management practices cause salinity built up in paddy fields Observations show that lack of surface drainage is the main cause of salinity development in Sri Lankan paddy fields.
Seepage and runoff water which collects in depressions in inland scape evaporate leaving salts dissolved in them causing salinity built up.
Collection of water in these depressions or low lying areas can be due to purposeful blocking of drainage ways or by mere negligence by the farmers.
Improvement of drainage will correct the problem.
Iron toxicity Iron toxicity is a problem largely found in the rice soils of intermediate zone and up and low country Wet Zone soils.
The problem is commonly observed in flat valleys and its occurrence is mainly confined to those positions in the flat valley where interflow streamlines from adjacent landscape emerge within the valley.
Interception of this interflow is a water management practice that can alleviate the problem.
This can be achieved by digging drains at the boundary between paddy land and adjacent highland.
It is not an exaggeration that total success of rice weed control is a function of better water management.
Abundance composition and temporal distribution of weeds in rice fields are controlled by the depth and duration of water availability.
Most of the weed seeds are highly sensitive to soil moisture and standing water.
Usually optimum soil moisture regime for weed seed germination is below the saturated conditions.
Increasing soil moisture above saturated levels progressively reduces the seed germination and maintenance of standing water for one to two inches can arrest more than  of the potential weed emergence.
On the other hand periodic wetting and drying of rice soil provides an ideal soil moisture condition for a prolific weed growth.
Therefore maintaining standing water right from the inception of crop establishment is and effective method to reduce weed growth in rice.
In transplanted rice where seedlings are fairly tall an effective level of standing water can be maintained right from the planting.
In fact post planting weed competition could be completely eliminated in transplanted rice through management of water.
In broadcast rice however standing water can only be maintained in rice when the seedlings are at least  days old.
Water management in relation to plant disease control Moisture on foliage or standing water in the field is very important condition for fungal and bacterial disease occurrence and development.
Fungal spore germination requires a moisture film on the plant surface.
High relative humidity is essential in maintaining this leaf wetness that often occurred through condensation.
Since a normal paddy cultivation provides above conditions it is very difficult to use water management methods for disease control.
However prevention of rice field submerges by stormy rain water could prevent outbreak of bacterial blight bacterial leaf streak and sheath blight epidemics.
On the other hand upland dry soil condition completed with cool weather condition favour occurrence and development of blast disease.
Field water requirement for a rice crop depends mainly on the growth duration of the crop and its growing environment.
It is calculated that about  of the total water supplied to an irrigated crop is often supplied before the establishment of the rice crop and the amount is dependent on the soil drainage class weed density and time taken for land preparation.
Time taken for land preparation could be minimised to about  weeks using total killing herbicides e.g.
Paraquat which also would help to reduce one tillage operation and conserve irrigation water.
Dry sowing could be an alternative for the well drain or sandy soils where water use is very high.
Mulching straw after seeding could conserve moisture which facilitate early and uniform germination and suppress weeds to a certain extent.
However poor plastering of bunds and not puddling the field would increase subsequent water use due to rapid percolation and lateral seepage.
The potential of existing rainfall for growing rice in underutilized.
Timely cultivation with maximum utilization of rain water has a tremendous potential for increased rice production.
It will also maximize irrigation water use efficiency.
Initial land preparation with the onset of rains when soil is moist could not only conserve irrigation water but also help to plough deep into the soil and facilitate growing a longer duration rice crop without exposing to terminal drought.
Selection of an age class to suit the available water would increase the field irrigation water use efficiency.
In general lowering the age decreases the water requirement for paddy but at the expense of yield.
Cost of land preparation and other agronomic practices would be the same or higher except a small decrease in use of fertilizers and pesticides with short age varieties.
However short growing season demand better weed control and optimum timing which could increase cost of production.
Very short duration  days varieties Bg  could be used in drought prone areas to avoid terminal drought but potential yield of such varieties are rather low about  buac.
These varieties could be used as an escape mechanism.
Similarly Kakulan type varieties with good weed competitive ability e.g.
could also be used in areas with short growing season.
Scientists have been unsuccessful so far in developing varieties for drought avoidance or tolerance due to its complexity and difficulty in combining those desirable traits.
New techniques in breeding could be a solution to these problems.
One reason farmers keep rice fields continuously flooded is to keep down weeds which complete less well with rice under such conditions and also as an insurance against moisture stress.
Minimizing percolation and seepage losses by proper land preparation and plastering of bunds could keep standing water in the field for a long time which help in both conserving irrigation water and keep weed pressure low.
Rice does not require standing water to maximize yields.
Maintaining saturated condition could save up to  of water in clay loam soils IRRI  without yield reduction however weed control should be made through chemical mechanical and manual means.
Failure to maintain saturated condition drying could increase soil cracking which could increase percolation through soil cracks.
Weed control by chemicals would eventually be an alternative with scarce water and labour however risk of development of weeds resistant to herbicides human health and environment hazards and cost could increase with the increase usage of herbicides.
New frontier research is ongoing in many parts of the world to kill weeds by infecting their own natural pathogens.
Suppress growth using allelopathic activity against weeds.
New plant types to smother weeds.
A pest of young rice seedlings.
Adult and nymphs suck the cell sap from the leaf tissues.
Damaged leaves roll inwards along the margins feeding cause leaf drying resulting poor crop growth.
The damage is severe under water stress conditions.
Late planted crops are more prone for damage.
Short duration traditional rice varieties like Dahanala Kaluheenati Kalubalawee are resistant to thrips.
Heavy infestations produce symptoms of hopper burn.
Leaves dry and turn brown after insect feeding and patches of burned plants are often lodged.
It is a vector of grassy stunt and ragged stunt virus diseases.
The rice plant is most sensitive to attack at late vegetative and reproductive stages.
The economic threshold for BPH at booting stage is  per hill and at heading  per hill.
Since spiders are considered major predator of BPH the economic threshold levels are adjusted according to the number of spiders present.
Number of effective predators and parasites are known.
The caterpillars bore into the rice stem and hollow out the stem completely.
Attacked young plant shows dead heart and older plants show white heads.
Often plants break where the stem is hollowed out causing lodging.
The caterpillars infest the leaves and feed on the mesophyll.
They fasten the edges of a leaf together and live inside the rolled leaf.
Feeding reduces productive leaf area that affects plant growth.
Cloudy and humid weather shady locations and high Nfertilizer favor pest build up.
Severity of damage is related to the crop growth stage of attack.
The larvae move down between the leaf sheaths until they reach the apical bud or one of the lateral buds.
They lacerate the tissues of the bud and feed until pupation.
The feeding cause formation of a gall called a Silver or Onion shoot.
Galls terminate the tiller development and hence affect rice yield.
Gall midge damage is high in wet humid weather.
As such gall midge infestation is high in dry and intermediate zones in maha and in the wet zone during yala.
Resistance available in varieties like Ptb  Ptb  and Eswarakora has been used to develop a number of improved varieties with resistance to gall midge.
Since biotype development on resistant varieties is common breeding for resistance is difficult.
Paddy bug can feed and reproduce only on rice.
Adults and mature nymphs can feed and survive on alternate weed hosts.
Sheath mite can be considered as a serious pest in rice crop causing    yield losses.It is microscopic in size.Sheath mites live in the space between leaf sheaths and feed on the adaxial surface of leaf sheath and developing kernels.High infestation at booting stage of the crop resulted erected by the presence of chocolate brown colour lesions on leaf sheaths.
Four important species of pests of stored paddy and rice are found in Sri Lanka.
Two species of stored product pests belongs to genus Sitophilus are found in rice in Sri Lanka.
They are Sitophilus granerius and S. oryzae.
Infestation of these two species starts in the field.
Eggs laid on rice seeds hatch into tiny grubs which feed the grain.
Mature larvae are legless and dirty white about  mm long.
Pupation takes place in the grain.
Adult beetles are small brown weevils.
They are about.
mm long with rostrum.
This pest could be controlled by spraying the store with pirimiphosmethyl at the rate of  ml per  liters of water.
Spray gunny bags with the same insecticide and sundry them before use.
Red flour beetle is a secondary pest and their damage is extensive in previously holed or broken grains.
Both larvae and adults damage the seeds.
The larvae are yellowish white.
The head is pale brown.
They are about  mm long when fully grown.
Pupae are yellowish white at the early stages and become brown in colour later.
The adult is flat and reddish brown in colour.
This pest could be controlled by following sanitary measures and spraying pririmiphos methyl to the stores and gunny bag before use.
Numerous disease of rice caused by fungi bacteria viruses and nematode have been recorded in literature.
Some diseases occur where ever rice in grown.
Some are of both regional and international important others occur in local areas.
Some diseases reach epidemic proportion and causes serious crop losses which others causes only negligible crop losses.
This articles deals with only rice diseases of national importance which may causes considerable crop losses
How to diagnose rice diseases accurately in the field
Accurate diagnosis and timely solving of field problems in rice crop is a vital component of crop management which assures optimum use of inputs for enhanced productivity leading to increased profits.
Field problems in rice cultivation could broadly be divided into  major categories viz.
insect pests weeds and plant diseases.
Identification and management of problems related to insect pests and weeds are being presented in separate articles.
This article will focus on accurate diagnosis of rice disease related problems in the field and approaches for their appropriate management.
During the last  years major changes have occurred in the varietal composition of and cultural practices for rice in Sri Lanka.
Prior to  hundreds of tall traditional cultivars were planted into M ha of rice extent in Sri Lanka.
However beginning  new improved varieties NIV of rice were introduced and at present  of rice extent is cultivated to about  NIVs.
This indicates the reduced genetic variability of rice crop.
New improved varieties are characterized by early maturity photoperiod insensitivity short stature high tillering and dark green leaves.
Introduction of NIVs compelled farmers to use improved cultural practices such as better water  weed control application of higher rates of fertilizer and establishment of higher plant populations per unit area.
The development of major irrigation facilities such as Mahaweli and availability of early maturing photoperiod  insensitive varieties have enabled the farmers in Sri Lanka to grow successive rice crops throughout the year in large extents.
Reduced genetic variability comprising few NIVs improved cultural practices and continuous cropping with rice helped to increase the rice production in the country however the same factors increased the genetic vulnerability of the rice crop to diseases and insect pests.
Each season the rice crops in farmer fields are affected by many plant disease problems.
Effects of plant diseases on rice crop productivity often varies depending on inherent capacity of the variety to withstand the disease condition in question environmental factors stage of crop growth level of soil fertility management and indirect and harmful effects of agrochemicals such as herbicides and other pesticides.
Plant disease problems can be grouped into two major areas; plant disorders and plant diseases for the convenience of discussion.
A plant disorder is a state of disruption of the normal healthy status of the plant or plant parts caused by external factors such as soil problems iron toxicity saline soil acid sulfate soil deficiencies of nitrogen phosphorous potassium and zinc environmental stresses water stresses cold temperature or other physical effects wind damage insect damage.
Symptoms of plant disorders cannot be transferred from an affected plant to a healthy plant.
A plant disease on the other hand is defined as an impairment of the normal physiological functioning of a plant or plant part caused by disease causing agents such as fungi bacteria viruses or nematodes.
Plant diseases can be spread from an infected plant into a healthy plant.
The symptoms of many rice plant disorders diseases and insect pest attacks have been very clearly described and recorded individually.
However in field situations these diseases disorders or pest attacks do not always occur in isolation but rather as mixed occurrences.
Therefore identification of the primary cause of the field problem in question is of vital importance in providing an effective and efficient managementcontrol measures.
To establish an accurate diagnosis of a field problem adoption of three logical steps as indicated below are very helpful.
They are; a investigation and collection of previous and current season management practices field history b observation of field symptoms for any pattern of occurrence and c close examination of affected individual plants on whole plant basis in comparison to healthy plants from the same fields.
These steps would provide some very useful clues as to what factors may be involved with the present field problem leading to accurate diagnosis of causal factors.
Field history is a crucial consideration in making a proper diagnosis.
We learn from the past so it becomes imperative to know last years crop and variety rate and kind of fertilizers used pesticide applied and tillage programs.
Rice crops planted on fields with vegetable crops in the previous season are liable to get more diseases such as blast sheath blight and bacterial leaf blight due to luxurious plant growth caused by higher level of residual plant nutrients.
Other factors that could play a role in our present diagnosis are last years growing conditions and occurrence and distribution of similar field problems or unrelated symptoms if any.
Are the affected plants confined to a specific area of ill drained or well drained portion of the field These historical information would suggest if the field problem concerned is a new occurrence or a reappearance of seasonal occurrence.
Then the next step is to focus on this years management procedures and the present field problem to see if common crop and soil fertility management practices have been attended to.
Distribution of affected plants in a field is studied to understand if the problem is developing a pattern.
Are the disorders associated with particular parts of the field such as headlands well drained or lowlying areas or border rows Border plants showing normal healthy appearance while center plants showing yellowing and poor growth could be due to lack of sufficient plant nutrients.
The crop growth stage may provide possible causes of the present problem as some pest and diseases are crop growth stage specific.
Are single plants affected groups of plants or are large areas of the field showing uniform symptoms The problem may be related to environmental conditions such as low or high temperature water availability related to field practices such as herbicide or pesticide application biological or a combination of above factors.
A stunted plant may be an indication of poor root growth as a result of compacted shallow plough pan root rot root injury from nematode feeding or a nutrient deficiency.
Discoloration missing plants or a stunting of plants in pockets could indicate a high population of nematodes root rots or specific soil related problem.
Once the field has been sufficiently scouted and analyzed the affected plants should be examined on whole plant basis in relation to healthy plants from same fields so that useful clues may be found.
Symptoms of affected plants hold the key to an accurate diagnosis of the field problem in question.
Symptoms and signs of already recorded rice diseases have been very well described and recorded and therefore one should use such available literature in relation to present field problem in question.
Careful examination should include looking for discoloration abnormal growth or wilting of the leaves storm and insect injuries lesions galls or any abnormality on the stem that may result in a disruption in the flow of water or nutrients.
Leaf symptoms are often a reflection of root abnormalities; therefore plants should be carefully dug up and the soil removed from the roots.
Without close observation of root system herbicide injury could be confused with a root rot.
Both potentially cause browning of leaves or seedling death.
Roots should appear offwhite with elongated fibrous lateral rootlets.
Root diseases may be observed either as a brown discoloration of the root or lesions.
Nematode feeding and herbicide injury may be confused and normally require a soil analysis to determine the cause of a stunted or stubby root system.
An example is dinitro aniline carryover and nematode injury to corn.
The symptoms of both causes are short stubby roots.
A rotted root system may be caused directly by a root rotting pathogen or indirectly as secondary rot of dead tissue initially killed by excessive moisture or phytotoxicity effects of residual herbicides.
In plant disease diagnosis and recognition it is best to take a holistic approach in your investigations.
Look at all aspects of a fields history observe the entire field for patterns and finally examine the entire plant.
Making a diagnosis from insufficient observations is a disservice to a client and yourself.
Utilize your past training the literature and the opinions of others to their fullest.
Alternatives exist for providing a proper diagnosis.
Some plant diseases have symptoms that are relatively unique; thus a diagnosis can be based only on the symptom.
In other instances symptoms are not a clear reflection of a specific disease and a wellequipped laboratory becomes important in identifying the causal agent.
Plant or soil samples can be removed from the affected field and submitted to a trained professional.
These samples should include information on field history field symptoms and plant symptoms as you see them.
The care taken in providing the needed information removing the affected plant and submitting a properly packaged sample will be repaid with a reliable diagnosis.
Rice diseases of economic importance that need careful attention for increased productivity in farmers fields are as follows.
Rice varietal improvement program always focus on breeding for disease resistance wherever possible.
Therefore newly developing varieties are screened for rice blast and bacterial diseases.
In addition special attention is made to select disease free or tolerant pedigree lines in the process of varietal development.
Introduction of new germ plasm for disease resistance are necessary in order to improve the durability of disease resistance of newly developing varieties.
In order to manage rice diseases in the farmer fields integrated disease management program has to be adopted.
This program should emphasize use of quality seed paddy proper control of weeds and balance application of major plant nutrients.
It may infect young seedlings leaves panicles and other aerial parts of the adult plant.
It is also known as leaf blast node blast panicle blast or neck rot.
Leaf spots are of spindleshaped with brown or reddishbrown margins ashy centers and pointed ends.
Fully developed lesions normally measures.
cm in length and.cm in breadth.
Their characteristics vary with the age susceptibility level of the cultivar and environmental factors.
When nodes are infected they become black and rotted.
Infection of panicle base causes rotten neck or neck rot and causes the panicle to fall off.
In severe infection secondary branches and grains are also affected.
Found in both upland and lowland environments blast occurs most often in upland environments in Sri Lanka.
Water deficiency predisposes the crop to severe infection in all environments.
The upland ecosystem with high night humidity accompanied by low night temperature presents a favorable environmental for development of blast.
Rice grown in irrigated flooded condition are at a less risk for diseases development.
Use of resistant varieties is the first important step in successful disease management program.
Application of high amount of nitrogenous fertilizers induces a heavy incidence of blast in disease susceptible varieties irrespective of the supply of phosphorus or potassium.
Adjustment of planting time to avoid blast favorable weather condition may not be practicable.
Suitable fungicide can be used at the onset of disease under disease favorable conditions.
Sheath blight is caused by the fungi Rhisoctonia solani.
Sheath blight is perhaps the second most important fungal disease of rice in Sri Lanka.
Symptom become apparent at filtering or flowering stage.
Spots or lesions first develop near the water level in flooded fields or soil in upland fields and spots initially appear on the leaf sheath.
Spots may be oral or ellipsoidal and measure  cm long.
Lesions on the leaf blade are usually irregular and banded with green brown and orange coloration.
Lesions are greenish white in the center with brown margins.
At advanced stages when the flag leaf is infected the panicle exertion is affected.
Leaves with extended lesions.
Eventfully die.
Asexual overwintering structures known as sclerotia are formed on leaf sheath surface.
They are usually  mm in diameter white when young turn brown or purplish brown at maturity and fall off easily on to soil surface and remain for years.
heath blight incidence is higher in drained rice fields than in upland fields.
Infection normally occurs through sclerotia which survive in soil for a long time depending on the temperature and moisture levels.
Infected straw stubble weeds are other source of primary inoculum.
High humidity > and temperature up to C high tillering short statured early maturing varieties specially at higher plant densities and heavy use of nitrogenous fertilizers are two other factors attributing to increased incidence of sheath blight.
There are no genetically resistant varieties to this disease.
However varieties with clean plant base ie varieties with less or no unproductive tillers escape disease.
Brown spot caused by the fungus Cochiobolus miyabeanus is another rice diseases found in some parts of Sri Lanka.
The disease was also called Helminthosporium leaf spot.
When C. miyabeanus attacks the plants at emergence the resulting seedling blight causes sparse or inadequate stands and weekend plants.
Leaf spots are present on young rice; however the disease is more prevalent as the plants approach maturity and the leaves begin to senesce.
Yield losses from leaf infection or leaf spots are probably not serious.
When the fungus attacks the panicle including the grain economic losses occur.
Heavy leaf spotting is an indication of some unfavorable growth factor usually a soil problem.
The pathogen also attacks the coleoptiles leaves leaf sheath branches of the panicle glumes and grains.
The fungus causes brown circular to oval spots on the coleoptile leaves of the seedlings.
It may cause seedling blight.
Leaf spots are found throughout the season.
On young leaves the spots are smaller than those on upper leaves.
The spots may vary in size and shape from minute dark spots to large oval to circular spots.
The smaller spots are dark brown to reddishbrown.
The larger spots have a dark brown margin and a light reddishbrown or gray center.
The spots on the leaf sheath and hulls are similar to those on the leaves.
The fungus attacks the glumes and causes a general black discoloration.
The fungus also attacks the immature florets resulting in no grain development or kernels that are lightweight or chalky.
Brown spot is an indicator of unfavorable growth conditions.
These unfavorable growth conditions include insufficient nitrogen inability of the plants to use nitrogen because of injury to root system by root rot or other unfavorable soil conditions.
As the plants approach maturity brown spot becomes more prevalent and the spots are larger on senescing leaves.
> Damage from brown spot can be reduced by maintaining good growing conditions for rice by proper fertilization crop rotation land leveling proper soil preparation and water management.
False smut caused by the fungus Ustilaginoidea virens is a minor disease in Sri Lanka.
The disease is characterized by large orange to browngreen fruiting structures on one or more grains of the mature panicle.
When the orange covering ruptures a mass of greenishblack spores is exposed.
The grain is replaced by one or more sclerotia.
All varieties appear to have a high level of resistance and disease control measures are not required.
Many fungi infect developing grain and cause spots and discoloration on the hulls or kernels.
Damage by the rice stinkbug Oebalus pugnax F. also causes discoloration of the kernel.
Kernels discolored by fungal infections or insect damage are commonly called pecky rice .
This is a complex disorder in rice that involves many fungi the whitetip nematode and insect damage.
High winds at the early heading stage may cause similar symptoms.
Proper insect control and disease management will reduce this problem.
Leaf Scald disease caused by Gerlachia oryzae is common and sometimes severe in major rice growing districts in Sri Lanka.
The disease affects leaves panicles and seedlings.
The pathogen is seed borne and survives between crops on infected seeds.
The disease usually occurs on maturing leaves.
Lesions start on leaf tips or from the edges of leaf blades.
The lesions have a chevron pattern of light tan and darker reddishbrown areas.
The leading edge of the lesion usually is yellow to gold in color.
Fields appear yellow or gold.
Lesions from the edges of leaf blades have an indistinct mottled pattern.
Affected leaves dry and turn strawcolored.
Panicle infestations cause a uniform light to dark reddishbrown discoloration of entire florets or hulls of developing grain.
The disease can cause sterility or abortion of developing kernels.
Control measures are not recommended but foliar fungicides used to manage other diseases have activity against this disease.
Narrow brown leaf spot caused by the fungus Cercospora janseana varies in severity from year to year and is more severe as rice plants approach maturity.
Leaf spotting may become very severe on the more susceptible varieties and causes severe leaf necrosis.
Some premature ripening yield reduction and lodging occur.
Symptoms include short linear brown lesions most commonly found on leaf blades.
Symptoms also occur on leaf sheaths pedicels and glumes.
Leaf lesions are  mm long and about  mm wide.
They tend to be narrower shorter and darker brown on resistant varieties and wider and lighter brown with gray necrotic centers on susceptible varieties.
On upper leaf sheaths symptoms are very similar to those found on the leaf.
On lower sheaths the symptom is similar to a net blotch or Cercospora sheath spot in which cell walls are brown and intracellular areas are tan to yellow.
Species of the nematode Meloidogyne cause root knot.
The disease symptoms include enlargement of the roots and the formation of galls or knots.
The swollen female nematode can be found in the center of this tissue.
Plants are dwarfed yellow and lack vigor.
The disease has been reprted from Hambantota area since past  years and it was detected in other parts of the country such as Kurunegala Pollonnaruwa and even in Ampara during Yala .
The nematode becomes inactive after prolonged flooding.
Deep ploughing and application of organic matter help reduce the disease condition.
This disease is caused by the fungal pathogen Sarocladium oryzae.
Symptoms are most severe on the uppermost leaf sheaths that enclose the young panicle during the boot stage.
Lesions are oblong or irregular oval spots with gray or lightbrown centers and a dark reddishbrown diffuse margin or the lesions may form an irregular target pattern.
The lesion is usually expressed as a reddishbrown discoloration of the flagleaf sheath.
Early or severe infections affect the panicle so that it only partially emerges.
The unemerged portion of the panicle rots turning florets redbrown to dark brown.
Grains from damaged panicles are discolored reddishbrown to dark brown and may not fill.
A powdery white growth consisting of spores and hyphae of the pathogen may be observed on the inside of affected sheaths.
Insect or mite damage to the boot or leaf sheaths increases the damage from this disease.
This disease affects most rice varieties.
The disease is usually minor affecting scattered tillers in a field.
Occasionally larger areas of a field may have significant damage.
Control measures are not recommended.
Fungicidal sprays used in a general disease management program reduce damage.
Weed flora varies from place to place due to type of rice culture soil type hydrology tillage cultural practices and irrigation pattern etc.
Echinochola crusgalli is rated as the most troublesome weed in both well and poorly drained soils.
Ischeamum rugosum and leptochloa chinensis are becoming important in rice fields due to continuous application of herbicides.
Weed competition do not occur during the entire cropping period.
Control of weeds in the critical period of competition is important.
Usually it commences around  weeks of seeding and may continue up to  weeks.
Hence early weeding is important to reduce yield losses.
Weeds are most efficiently and economically controlled by the simultaneous application of a variety of practices.
These practices including preventive cultural manual mechanical biological and chemical.
Integrated weed control practices IWP combines these different practices.
If any single control method is used for a long time weed species resistant to that method may build up and eventually the control measure will fail.
So the objective of IWP is to create conditions unfavorable to weeds while maintaining suitable condition for crop.
Recommended varieties of potatoes designed Nuwara Eliya Badulla Puttalam have been recommended for the Jaffna area.
A harvestable variant of  months.
After applying fertilizer on the surface the soil should be added to the top.
potato plant can withstand dry conditions but it needs to be done to obtain good growth and yield.
If there is a weakening of the water or if there is more water than necessary the turbans will have abnormal conditions.
Tuberculosis turbidity tingling and surface erosion and discoloration.
In the immediate vicinity of harvesting watering must be limited.
It is best to irrigate the leaves on the leaves.
Areas with a height of more than  feet above mean sea level are preferred for potato cultivation.
As a result potatoes can be cultivated well in the districts of Nuwara Eliya and Badulla.
When choosing a seedling care should be taken to select clean seeds with healthy characteristics.
Here It is necessary to have a diameter of  and have strong bristles of between  and  cm.
It is also important to have the roots at the starting point.
Water droplets for this crop are suitable for the cultivation of dried loamy sandy loams.
Dry and intermediate zones are established in the months of September and October with heavy rains.
One shoot should be planted with  inches of seedlings.
Cow in the  to  weeks of age cow urine can be rapidly and rapidly grown using urine  water .
Or else in the nursery after  to  weeks of age the nursery can be divided into g Urea Ure and g of Muriate of Potash.
The first crop yield can be obtained from  weeks.
Land cultivation and crop growth in any light soils grown as cave grows with crop growth.
The basic premise of establishing the crop is the soil under ground or flat ground cultivation.
Accordingly the cultivation methods of cultivation season and zone of different cultivation methods have been adapted.
The use of broad shoots in the Yala season and short shoots in Maha also uses short shoots.
There are no indicators of disease and pests that are locally identified for cattle cultivation.
However when cultivating on the same site the root causes of the bumblebee cause the growth of the plant to weaken and die.
The use of healthy tubers to avoid this can be done by applying a round bowel movement such as Corter before planting using organic fertilizers in large quantities.
Innala is the most profitable tuber crop that is grown in Sri Lanka.
It is grown basically for the local market and where cultivation is done in large extents marketing is not a problem.
A net profit of over Rs   acre is earned by certain farmers in the traditional areas.
It also has a nutritive value that is similar to potato and is considered a safe vegetable as it is grown basically without any pesticides.
Cassava which belongs to the family Euphorbiaceae is a robust productive starchy root crop that is grown clonally almost entirely within the tropics grown chiefly as a food.
But it is also an important animal feed and it has several significant industrial uses.
Cassava is a perennial crop originated in Brazil with Central America and introduced to Sri Lanka in the Dutch regime.
Since then cassava stands out in the country as the most important source of energy for the calorie deficient lowincome population strata.
But from the recent past it has now become a major horticultural export commodity earning foreign exchange.
Cassava roots combine high energy and high levels of some vitamins minerals and dictary fiber and contain no trypsin inhibitor but create a problem due to presence of cyanide which is removed by postharvest treatments and cooking.
The edible green leaves of cassava are a good source of protein vitamins and minerals and are often used to augment the rural diet.
Although cassava is not a nutritionally superior crop from the agricultural point of view its popularity among resource poor farmers is due to its remarkable hardiness drought resistance relative freedom from pest attack and its ability to give acceptable yields under unfavoured conditions with low inputs and attention.
It is mainly grown as a rain fed crop throughout the island excluding high elevation areas and mostly concentrating in the wet and intermediate zones.
The production systems of cassava have been identified as a backyard crop and large scale openland cultivation in the wet zone Gampaha Colombo Kegalle Rathnapura and Matara Districts as well as in the intermediate zone Kurunegala district are mixed cropped with coconut and pineapple cultivations.
Chena cultivation in large scale in the dry zone Putlam Anuradhapura Ampara Hambantota Moneragala Districts is viable.
Peak production falls during Maha season.
Three improved cassava varieties namely MU var.
Peradeniya CARI and Kirikawadi having high yield and acceptable horticultural qualities have been recommended for cultivation.
Besides these  varieties there are few farmers selections with better consumer acceptance that are being cultivated.
The cultivation of sweet potato has traditionally been confined to varying growing systems such as open land highland rice fallow system under shade owita and homestead conditions.
Sweet potato has remarkable ability to convert solar and soil energies into carbohydrates giving impressive yields under marginal and stress situations having low input requirements and little attention wide adaptability flexibility in crop management and nonseasonality make sweet potato a viable crop in all agro ecological zones excluding high elevations.
Semivine plant type with entire to very slightly lobbed leaves.
Root tubers have dark pinkish skin with highly variable tuber shapes which are fusiform.
Semivine plant type with entire leaves.
The mature leaves are green in colour and the tender leaves are light green with purple at margin.
Petioles are light green with purple at leaf end and petiole base.
Root tubers are fusiform shape with purple coloured skin.
It is a polycross hybrid and maternal parent is a native variety Belibatala.
It has a bushy plant type with deeply cut leaf laminas.
Vines and leaves are green in colour with purplish green tender leaves.
Root tubers are highly uniform and fusiform in shape having pinkish orange skin.
It is a selection from the local sweet potato collection and planting material is available in all sweet potato growing areas.
Semivine plant type with entire to very slightly lobbed leaves.
Root tubers are highly uniform and fusiform in shape having purple skin.
Wariyapola white is a mutant originated from the variety Wariyapola red.
Semivine plant type with entire to very slightly lobbed leaves.
Root tubers are highly uniform and fusiform in shape having white skin.
Semivine plant type the leaves are entire to slightly lobbed vines are yellowish green except tender vine apices are slightly pigmented.
The root tubers are round elliptical shape with pink skin.
It is a natural selection from Kalutara district.
BW   is a semivine type plant with light green stems.
Leaf type is moderately lobbed with purple colouration at the base of the leaf on the lower side.
Tuber shape is egg shaped with tapering ends and skin colour is white.
It is a natural selection from Galle district.
Viny plant type with moderately lobbed leaves.
Mature leaves are green while the young leaves are reddish brown in colour.
It has conical shape root tubers with white skin.
It is a polycrose hybrid and material parent is recommended variety CARI.
Semivine plant type with numerous major branches.
Entire vines are green in colour except the very tender vine apices which are slightly pigmented with moderately lobbed leaves.
The root tubers are round to elliptical shape highly uniformed with white skin.
Sweet potato is grown in the tropical sub tropical and warm temperate regions of the world.
Sweet potato is a sun loving crop.
It requires considerable amount of rain during the growth period and a dry period during root formation.
Warm sunny days and cool nights are very much favourable for storage root formation in sweet potato.
Tuber yields are reduced considerably if drought occurs within first six weeks after planting.
Sweet potato can be successfully grown in a variety of soils however well drained sandy loam soils are best suited.
On heavy clay soils shoots grow well but yield of tubers will be poor with deformed tubers.
Till to a depth of cm.
Soils must be well drained and well aerated for a successful tuber growth.
Ridge and furrow method mound method narrow bed and broad bed method are practiced in sweet potato cultivation in different areas.
Ridge and furrow method and narrow bed method are better than other methods.
Vine cuttings are suitable for planting.
The vine tip cuttings are found to be best to get higher tuber yield from sweet potato.
In some varieties recurrent use of vines as planting material for more than  seasons showed marked decrease in yield.
For these varieties root tubers can be sprouted and get cuttings.
About    cuttings are required to plant one hectare.
Under rainfed conditions plant with the Yala and Maha rains.
In the wet zone in both Yala and Maha and in the dry zone in Maha season only.
Under irrigated conditions planting can be done at any time of the year.
Application of fertilizer should be done before  days to get a maximum vegetative growth of the crop.
After  days vegetative growth should be minimise and root production must be increased.
Basal fertilizer should apply after  days and top dressing at  days after planting.
For fertile soils fertilization should be discouraged because sweet potato when over fertilized grows vines and leaves at the expense of fleshy roots.
Sweet potato is a quick growing crop and it covers the soil quickly and suppresses most of the weeds.
However weeding may become necessary particularly in the early stages of growth.
To protect the crop from weeds at least  weedings and earthing up has to be given within  days after planting along with fertilizer application.
Diseases are not serious in sweet potato.
However root rot caused by Fusarium has been identified in sweet potato.
The symptoms are yellowing of leaves and later drying of vines and rotting of roots.
Controlmeasures are improved drainage ensure field sanitation and use resistant varieties.
The crop attains maturity in   to  months after planting depending upon the variety and environmental conditions.
The maturity of tubers can be determined by cutting fresh tubers.
The cut surface of the immature tubers gives a dark greenish colour while in mature tubers the cut ends dry clearly.
After removing the vines tubers are dug out without causing injury.
The harvested roots can be transported to the market or can be stored.
The tubers are normally cured by keeping in a open place for  to  days.
After curing sweet potato roots can be stored for  months.
Several large leaves also sprout from the main stem which are sagittate and erect with long ribbed petioles; inflorescences sprout between the leaves in a spadix with a white  to  cm spathe which closes at its base in the form of a spherical chamber and opens at the top into a concave lamina; the spadix is cylindrical slightly longer than the spathe with female flowers on the lower portion male flowers on the upper portion and sterile flowers in the middle portion.
The spadices are rarely fertile and produce few viable seeds.
The growth cycle lasts from nine to  months during the first six months the corms and leaves develop; in the last four months the foliage remains stable and when it begins to dry the plants are ready for the cormels to be harvested.
Also it can be cultivated under coconut and banana cultivation in wet and intermediate zones.
It is low risk as well as low in pest and disease attack.
It produces high quality corms with good market demand.
It can be suited for any cultivating method.
Xanthoxoma can be harvested within  months with low attention too.
Mother corms obtain after harvesting can be used as planting materials.
About  good quality plantlets can be obtained out of well grown mother corm.
Good quality high yielding mother corms must be obtained as a mother corms.
The planting material most commonly used are .
thickness mother corm slices.
They give greater yields than the cormels which are also same times used.
On set of rain in the most suitable time period to planting.
A coconut husk layer can be used to retain moisture in dry areas.
In the mixed cropping drying out will be reduced due to perennial main crops.
It reduces the drying out of soil.
In the heavy rain season split application must be done as a top dressing.
The inorganic fertilizer must be applied only with the availability of water.
Thus after the rain or watering.
Therefore time of application of fertilizer determine by the soil water availability.
However recommended dosage must be applied.
The recommended dosage must be applied according to the age of the plant.
Otherwise yield and quality of the cormels will be reduced.
The first six months is a critical period for weed control.
Backed up by the application of preemergence herbicides preparation of the ground for planting ploughing and raking helps considerably in controlling weeds.
As the plants need to be earthed up several times this contributes to keeping the soil clean.
But with the water logging condition and clay soil root rot disease can be occurred.
Leaves get yellowish and dried off.
Apart of that Aphids and hoppers damage to leaves.
Nematode disease also can be seen with the cultivation of same crop in same field continuously.
Good cultural practices avoid all those hazardous conditions.
Leafs growth rate will be reduced with the cormels get matured.
At that time leaf size and petiole length get reduced.
Same time cormel growth occurs on top of the earth.
In commercial plantations harvesting is carried out ten to  months after planting when the leaves have turned yellow and are beginning to dry.
The crop is harvested by hand or by a semimechanized method.
The commercial product is washed dried and disinfected carefully before being placed in boxes in coldstorage rooms.
In small plantations harvesting of the cormels begins  months after planting and is done without uprooting the plant  tons of yield per hectare can be obtained in well managed cultivation.
Harvested corms can be storage long time without destroying the quality.
Store the cleaned corms with  layers under good ventilation.
Elongated flask shape same sized front and tail end corm with brown colour shale cover corms have high market demand.
Its hard to imagine that the fruit we have forgotten is a fruit with the most popular and great commercial value in the world.
The present society has abandoned the cruel to the extent that the present society does not know a tree or a cabbage.
Cropping fruit which is naturally grown in dry zone forests has not arrived in the market for many years.
The scapegoats in Sri Lanka should be scrambled or scrupulously to look for plans for developing fruit cultivation in our country.
The evergreen tree of Sri Lanka is naturally occurring in the forests of about  meters above sea level in the wet and dry zone of Sri Lanka.
It is rarely seen in mosquito gardens that do not grow as a crop.
Often the seamonsoon rainforests of the dry zone can be seen.
Often there is a local saltwater cat species.
The small fruits are brownish and green in color shaped oval or round.
There is only one seed in the sea.
It is surrounded by a rosy massage of juice.
When the flesh is more or less the same as when the flesh is over when the flesh is overcooked and the sweetness of the marshmallow or the taste is very low
Among the locally slaughtered people there are moraganeous names.
The purple ointment has a unique flavor and aromatic origins.
Currently the local mosquito nets weigh a range of  to  grams.
The lukewarm soybean species are full of fruit and juice and are more delicious.
These are suitable for planting.
It does not occur every year from March to April but it does not occur every year due to the harvesting of the fruitful branches of the calyxus and the irrigated fruit in September.
Hence fruit formation takes a long time.
As a result of the destruction of the crop the nonreplanting process and the clearing of forests for development purposes the mahogany has been threatened with extinction.
The sea is very rare and has a nutritional value.
In Sri Lanka
Only used as fresh fruit.
But in countries such as Thailand and China the color and flavor of the fruits of the fruit are persistent freezing or frozen and then fresh fruits
Used for production.
Sometimes it is only logical to save the palm and consume commercial bulk bottles.
Thus there is a good local and export market for those in the sea.
The crucifix is ​​also used to make syrups and mix with other fruits and the delicious marshy juice can be used to drink even without sugar.
The book says that all parts of the herb are medicinal.
It is also said that the brain is an antioxidant and protects the youth.
Grafted or planted seedlings begin for about     years.
In such a large bowl a maha seedlings can be successfully planted.
A seedling grows to about  feet tall when it comes to fruiting and the ability to control plant height and canopy.
Accordingly we have the possibility of producing crude for local and foreign markets if we select suitable varieties.
Is a plant native to Malaysia originating in Africa and Asia.
It is a plant of the flacourtiaceae which belongs to the plant and the trunk is not found on the trunk of the lion plant.
The flora of the worlds tree grows to the surface of the earth.
When the pink reddish leaves emerge the bright green turns green.
Flowering flowers in leaf bumps form clusters.
When ripe the bright red caviar must have a sour taste.
There are about  seeds of a bowl.
However there are many varieties of flavors in Sri Lanka.
Seeds can be propelled by seeds.
Its a better way of transplanting Louis.
Here the gingival is better.
The use of twigs and sprays can also be propagated by local plants.
Even for wet zone it is better to use fruits in dry zone areas.
The gardens are cultivated in gardens in lowlying areas of Sri Lanka.
The highest fruit is twice a year during the months of May  June and November  December.
The fruit can be reaped when it is slightly reddish.
The fruit is also used as a fresh fruit as well as jams jelly chutney and pickles.
In other countries names of domestic juice syrup as well as the fruit of the cereals are used as vegetable and spices cooked meats and ripe fruit dry bottles.
The fruit is vitamin C rich fruit.
Its high antioxidant properties make it very useful to consume disease such as cancer.
Ayurveda is used as a medicine for the treatment of rheumatic diseases.
Due to the lower branches the red shrubs and the fruit are very attractive and it is a beautiful tree for decorating cupboards.
Nelli is a tropical evergreen tree.
But in the subtropical countries new leaf fallen in the old leaf during one year of the year.
Nellie commonly known as Gazete Nelli is widely known as Vitamin C as a highweight fruit.
Fruits contain between  and  milligrams of vitamin C  mg of  mg of fresh fresh fruit.
It contains important antioxidants and polyphenols.
Nelli is also of medicinal quality and all parts are medicinal.
Nelli can produce a variety of products.
The medicinal value of nellie is well documented in the Ayurvedha book of the Card and the importance of this for a healthy life is well identified.
Nelli is also comprised of five tastes bitter yellow honey sour and salty.
Neli is a wellcultivated crop that is resistant to fire severe disease and pests low in cultivation control conditions.
This is a home gardens in India and Sri Lanka and Indias commercial cultivation is found.
Nellie is found in the ordinary market throughout the year as a herbal and nutritional value in Sri Lanka.
Almost all of these nelli are harvested from nelli plants in the dry zone.
In some intermediate and wet zone areas some home gardens also have good fruit trees and they earn an excellent annual income.
The local nellas have a lot of variety in the size and weight of the fruit.
Accordingly the weight of a local nella is weighing grams  grams.
A nurse of nellies from foreign countries has been found to be around to  grams.
People prefer to larger nuts
They are more expensive and their market prices are higher than small cows.
Nellie is naturally found in the tropics and subsoil regions of South Asia and the evergreen evergreen forests.
Origin originates from the Himalayas region in the south of Nepal north of India to the south and the Indian subcontinent.
These countries include Sri Lanka.
In the dry and intermediate zone of Sri Lanka nellies are found naturally in the forests of Bibila Badulla Monaragala Galoya Buttala Anuradhapura Ratnapura and Polonnaruwa.
Homemade in the wet zone famous
Nelly is welldeveloped both on the places and the roads.
The nellies grow well in dry and temperate climates and show strong resistance to climatic conditions.
Propagation of nellies Although the seeds are abundant the plants may differ from each other.
By grafting and planting of roots it is advisable to produce high quality plants.
The condom can be used successfully for transplantation.
Thickness induces the inhibition of seed germination in the nellies and decreases the germination rate of seeds.
Therefore shave the seedlings and take the soft seeds carefully carefully and accelerate the seedling to increase the percentage of germination.
Nelli seeds are naturally high in time for a few days in the sun
Soft seeds inside are easily separated as the sun bursts.
As a result the seeds of the mild seeds thus lost in a short period of time will be planted as soon as possible.
It is best to select a pestle or roots plant with a suitable mother plant for the installation of new plantation.
Planting should be done with the onset of rainfall.
If the seedling is planted then the grafting is to be planted at a distance of  meters and  meters apart.
When planting a nellie it is possible to apply a typical fruit tree in the field.
After  weeks of planting shade should be provided.
In addition the nelli plant is also a highly fruitful fruit bowl in large pots and can be used for urban gardens as well as for gardening with limited space.
Nellie plant can be well dry under dry and dry conditions under climatic conditions but for dry plants
Once every  days water is fed for  days and the growth of plants is good as well as plant growth.
But when the blossoming is done dry conditions should be avoided.
Even though there are no serious diseases and pests that can not be found in the tree they can be seen as commercial cultivation and there are minor diseases and pests.
The damage to the trunk and branches of the perforter is the most prevalent.
Also pomegranate
The butterflys laryngeal drains away from the nellies and creates its holes.
In addition flour macauna is also found in a minor manner.
Fruit and leaf rust can be important in regard to nellillary diseases.
In addition the softening rot is also common in the fruit.
This is likely to affect the quality of yield as a postharvest loss.
Crops
These damage can be controlled by taking care of the sanitary conditions.
t is also used as a fresh fruit for preparing preserved jellies pickles jams cordials and fresh fruit drinks.
As a dried nilly fruit leaf.
It is used to treat nerve heart liver and skin diseases in ayurveda.
It
Hair pigment and hair used in the hair.
This is an important medicine in Ayurveda.
Neli is a beautiful plant especially gardening.
The lattices for the thugs the quadunda the Ukkoressa and the gravel are demolished.
After consuming the batter of the turbid the Sri Lankans may be given the name of UGuressa.
Due to the fact that the plant grows in the age when the plant grows at the age of the plant the name may be used.
It is a popular fruits plant which is definitely included in the backyard of the tigerness of the tropics in the dry and wet zone of Sri Lanka.
This can be cultivated in areas up to  meters from the sea level.
Huguessens usually grow in bisexual plants but sometimes the flowers are male and female respectively bicentenary.
Then males are not fetal in fruit trees and female plants need to be pollinated to produce fruits.
Therefore it is best to plant a bud or branch of a biannual tree with high yields.
Shrubs form a bushes with a height of  m. The plant can be grown in the branches and grooves at a very young age.
The bark is about  inches long.
The leaves of the leaves are distinctively red or pink when the leaves are tender.
Shell shapes vary in size.
During the months of December to April fresh flowers appear in the wicker canopy.
Arthropod seeds are propagated by seeds by airborne shoots shoots buds and roots.
It is best to produce plants from vegetative propagation because it is possible for males to grow in the propagation of seeds.
Seeds germination takes a long time.
According to research data  of the germination percentage takes about  days.
Germination can be speeded up.
In these circumstances the vegetative propagation is the most appropriate way to produce plants.
It is also propagated by twigs and  of the gross seed production is successful in plant production.
Serious pests have not been reported for the throat.
But caterpillars aphids scales and insects have been reported.
The major cause of colander involvement is arthritic and rusty.
The harvest is severely damaged.
It is possible to reduce the damage to the plant by maintaining tungsten plants and curing hygiene in order to minimize sunflower plantations.
It is also important to exclude infected fruits properly.
If the disease is not controlled the recommended fungicides should be used.
At the next seasons after the harvest the recommended fungicides should be sprayed with tender leaves and mature leaves to soak in the flowering time and the signs.
After planting a vegetative propagation the fruit begins to sprout for  years.
The fruit begins to sprout within a year after planting a bud or a branch of a pot plant.
The yield of collagen can be determined by the color of the fruiting change.
The fading green is darker darker purple.
In the harvest it is only best to reap the fruit trees.
Here harvesting should take place over a period of time but it will yield a higher quality and qualitative yield.
They can be used as fresh fruit jams jelly chutney fruit juices and wine.
In Ayurvedic remedies every part of the plant is used as a herb.
Fertility The fruit and leaves to heal the liver and swelling of the liver and malaria
In diseases such as diarrhea snakebites are used to exfoliate the crushed cortex sesame oil and the treatment of rheumatic pains.
Dried leaf lines are a good help to heal wounds.
Juice and unripe juices are used to heal diarrhea and dysentery.
UGurussa plant is a plant used in landscape decorations and can be used for wind barriers and safe fences.
In countries like India Hulusan leaves are used as animal foods.
The use of wood from the bulk of the wood can be used in knives and hand tractors such as domestic and agricultural utensils and wood fuel.Light can be propagated by seeds.
But since the lifespan of lunow is shortened the seeds should be removed during the course of a few days.
Germination takes about  months.
If irrigation is removed salt seeds can be germinated for approximately  weeks.
Propagation transplantation and plant propagation can be done by promoting the propagation by lightening propagation.
The fruit is used as fresh fruits milk foods and custard ice cream.
Into Ayurveda is used in the intestinal flora to treat pain in the intestines.
Lightweight calcium sample carotene is a very nutritious fruit extract.
Luvolus can be used successfully for potting A transplanted plant with a selected mother plant is best suited for this.
A lump of ungulates planted with flowers and fruit throughout the year.
In dry intermediate zone lowlands of Sri Lanka and in upcountry wet zones there is a small plant in domesticated and small shrubs.
There are two main species Botanically Ziziphus mauritiana and Ziziphus jujuba  but only in Sri Lanka Sisyphus Morrisana is found naturally in Sri Lanka.
This is especially noticeable in smallscale shrubs in dry zone regions which naturally increase and produce good yields.
The stump of the ghakkhas tree grows wide.
There are about  species of plants that can be seen as large as  m in height.
The leaf weevil has a diameter of  m spreading in the shade.
mature plants are found in old gardens.
Green yellow and orange are richly seasoned with rice and sour mixed sweetmeats.
Some fruits are starchy and help to improve the taste of the fruit.
High quality imported mining varieties that are imported and imported from overseas show better results than local species.
These mushrooms are large in size and the meat is of a tasty and attractive taste similar to apple and pears.
Having eaten three fruits of vitamin A B C and vitamins A it is scientifically discovered that in a grown man vitamin C meets the requirement one day.
According to the research data Sri Lanka has unique endemic species of mammals and Thailand and Malaysia have been found to have been breeding mammals.
A local meat bowl weighs between  and  grams and is larger than the weight and size of the nuts in foreign species found in Sri Lanka and is between  and  grams.
People are attracted to this type of fish.
In the wet and intermediate zone they also work well in the dry zone with high temperatures and low water levels.
Arid and semiarid regions which range in temperatures ranging from  degrees centigrade.
Rainfall in mm Although about  are high enough higher highland rainbands adversely affect.
In this case the fruits fruit is reduced.
Marine plant contains adaptive volumes for dry zone high temperature and low rainfall.
A glowing undergarment and sapphire leaves thorny stem and dolphin roots are some of these.
This plant has been able to survive in long dry periods due to this phenomenon.
In Sri Lanka the distribution of maize plants in Kurunegala Puttalam Hambanthota Matale Polonnaruwa and Trincomalee has been a common feature.
This plant works well with welldrained soil up to  meters above sea level.
Seedlings are available for planting by seeds.
Because the seed is tightly covered the seedling production can remove the dark itching and moderate seed growth in its center.
The quality plants can be produced by grafting onto neutropoid seedlings from a suitable mother plant.
The gum can be used successfully.
Branlings can also produce plants but they are less successful.
Well drained the clay percentage can be cultivated in lowland soil and cans.
When planting it is important to use as a fruit when planting a plant of propagation with highgrade varieties or such a selected mother plant.
Seeding is appropriate if it is used as a shrub or as animal feed.
When planting in a land the distance between the lines and plants is about  meters and the tree is planted according to the sequence of the other fruits then the plant is wellventilated to provide water and shade.
Also it is important to apply the recommended chemical fertilizers and organic fertilizer for the fruit for healthy and rapid growth in the plant.
Cement or plastic containers can also be used in pots.
It is suitable for   cubic feet of cement and a height of  cement or larger cement boards and a  liter plastic bowl.
According to the recommended method these containers should be filled with a mixture of topsoil sand and organic fertilizer mixture to ensure a proper moisture so that they can be drained.
An improved breeding variant planted in a bowl under good maintenance starts from  months to about a year during the short period of time.
This is perfect for a balcony project.
It is also an ideal fruit tree.
It has not been reported that severely affected areas have been affected by diarrhea.
But the roast nuts are severely damaged by the fruits.
Also the flowers and leaves of the liver are also important.
The fruit fly and baking caterpillar can be suppressed chemically and biologically.
The maize tree produces fruits for two fruits a year and in addition to the flowers at the same time the fruit of the fruit is ripe and ripe.
Throughout the year there are also smallscale or fruitbearing plants.
This is used as a fresh fruit in Sri Lanka.
Marsh can be used as fresh fruit in countries such as India China Zimbabwe and Sudan as well as for the manufacture of valueadded products such as jam cordial juice dried fruits and canned fruit.
Moss foliage can be used as an animal food and the trunk of the tree is fuel and wood and can be used for the production of medicinal herbs leaves stem and root bark.
However Sri Lankas mung plant is often used only as fruit which means gardening on the roadside and for domestic shading.
The Indonesian inhabitants made dry rice dried nuts jams from jelly jelly chutney from unripe nuts pickles
Eating.
Buckwheat leaves are used as a foodstuff for animal feed and seed protein as a source of protein.
The branches and bark are used as a fungicide as well as for the production of fuel and coal.
As a fresh fruit and as a value added commercial fruit there is a great potential for carrots.
Most of the time the sardineshaped sands tend to be brownishyellow in productivity.
The fingerprint is marked with oval shapes but the shoots are not seen.
The delicate tastes of the cream are styled and contain shiny parts of the sand.
It is also referred to as sand atha in folk vihara.
Bush beans and pole beans can be grown in all agroecological regions except the upcountry Wet Zone.
The soil should be ploughed to a depth of  cm and worked to a very fine tilth.
Planting after heavy rains is recommended for both Maha and Yala seasons.
Irrigate daily until germination is complete then once every  days until the crop is established.
Maintenance of adequate moisture during flowering and pod¬filling stages is very important.
Grade and handle pods carefully to avoid damage and pack in wellventilated bags if transported long distances.
In the upcountry Intermediate Zone about  tha of seedha can be produced when planted at a spacing of  x  cm and a density of  plantsha.
Egg plant or brinjal is a hardy plant compared to other vegetables grown in SriLanka.
Because of its hardiness it can be successfully grown in very dry areas under rainfed conditions or with minimum irrigation facilities.
It covers second large extent after curry banana.
Egg plant can be kept for more than one year in production by pruning at the end of the harvesting season.
The fruit colour varies from pure white to dark purple or black in different varieties.
This crop can be grown throughout the year in all Agroclimatic regions except up countrywet zone.
Grows well up to an elevation of about m in low country wet zone Intermediate up country intermediate and dry zone.
Eggplant is tolerant to drought.
Well drain light soils with a pH of.
are more suitable for the cultivation of brinjal.
As in other solanaeceous crop direct seeding is not practiced due to the small size of the seeds.
Twenty nursery beds of x  m are required to raised seedlings for  ha.
Soils should be worked to a fine tilth.
Prepare about leveled raised beds to a height of cm.
Incorporate well decomposed organic matter at the rate of  kgm.
Sterile seedbeds by burning them using straw and paddy husk.
Treat seeds with a recommended fungicide such as Captan or Thiram at the rate of gg of seed.
Seed should be planted in beds  cm apart at the depth of to  cm and cover with a thin layer of soil.
Spread a layer of straw mulch over beds and water daily.
Remove the mulch when the germination is complete.
Avoid exposure of seedlings to heavy rains and to prolong sunlight.
Harden seedlings by exposing them to sunlight and increasing irrigation intervals for one week before planting.
Seedlings are ready to transplant after  days.
Avoid field cropped with Solanaceous crops in the previous season to minimize the incidence of Bacterial wilt.
Plough the field to a depth of cm and prepare Planting holes with the dimension of  x  x cm.
Incorporate organic matter to the soil at the rate of tha.
Level the area and establish drains across slopes to ensure good drainage.
Selected field should not have a history of a cultivation of a solanaeceous crop at least  seasons.
After primary and secondary land preparation level the land and make planting holes at a spacing of x cm.
Addition of organic matter ghill to planting holes facilitate quick establishment of the transplant.
Planting can be done in the afternoon to avoid desiccation of seedlings.
Causal agent of this disease is fungus.
Symptoms of this disease are rotting the base of the nursery plants and then die off.
Common disease which affects the production of brinjal is bacterial wilt.
There is no chemical control for this disease which said to be the number one diseases for all solanaeceous crops.
Cultural practices such as deep drains to facilitate drainage and the use of resistant varieties can be recommended to control the incidence.
Causal agent of this disease is a fungus.
Symptoms of this disease are similar to that of bacterial wilt.
At the collar region of the affected plant lesions are visible.
By improving drainage this can be prevented.
Redomil as a soil application is very effective in controlling this disease.
Continuous cultivation of brinjal on a same field and non removal of plant parts of the previous brinjal cultivation aggravate this damage.
The symptoms first appear in immature shoots i.e.
wilting.
Soon after observing wilted shoot remove and destroy them.
The damage after flowering and fruiting can be controlled by using recommended insecticides.
Can begin harvesting about  days after transplanting.
Ten to twelve picks at weekly intervals are possible.
After  months harvesting period a ratoon crop can be raised if plants are pruned.
During  to  the total cultivation extent of brinjal increased from  ha to  ha.
The production increased from  to  tons in the same period.
The increased production is due to increased in extent as well as increased in productivity.
Overall the monthly average wholesale and retail prices of brinjal do not fluctuate very much compare to most of the vegetables grown in Sri Lanka.
This is indicated in the values given in the table.
This is because of steady supply to the market throughout the year.
Since this crop is growing all over the island this is possible.
The retail prices were roughly about  times the wholesale.
Tomato is one of the most widely cultivated vegetable crop in the world.
It is an important Source of vitamin.
An important cash crop for medium scale commercial farmers.
Its Origin is the South American Andes.
Tomato Contribute to a healthy well balanced diet.
They are rich in minerals vitamins amino acid Sugars and dietary fibers.
Tomato contains much Vitamin B and C iron and phosphorus although a ripe tomato contains as much as  to  percent water.
Tomato grows well on most mineral soil that has proper water holding capacity and aeration and is free of soil.
It prefers deep well drained sandy loam soils.
The upper layer needs to be permeable.
Soil depth of  to  cm is needed to grow a healthy crop.
Transplant the seedling to the field  weeks after sowing.
A week before transplanting seedlings should be hardened by reducing the application of water but  hours before they are taken out of the seedbed they should be thoroughly watered again to avoid excessive damage to the roots.
Seedlings of  cm tall with  true leaves are most suitable for transplanting.
Transplanting should be done in the afternoon or on a cloudy day reduce the transplanting shock.
Tomato is moderately tolerant to a wide range of pH but grows well in soils with a pH of.
addition of organic matter is in general favorable for good growth.
Tomato is not resistant to drought.
It is important to water the plant regularly especially during flowering and fruit formation the amount of water that is needed depend on the type of soil and on the weather.
White patches on the lower surface of leaves while the upper surface of leaves become yellowish then brown and leaves die seedling death may result.
Dark green water soaked spots appear at the blossom end of the fruit and enlarge until the fruits begin to ripen.
Affected tissues are hard and leathery initially but due to secondary infection fruit rot can develop.
When the colour changes from green to yellow should be harvested.
Capsicum can be grown throughout the year up to an elevation of  m. Supplementary irrigation is required during the yala season.
Loamy welldrained soils with pH range of  are preferred.
Excessive soil moisture is detrimental to growth.
There is an export potential for capsicum with fresh appearance and yellowish green colour.
Also the fruits should be uniform in size and shape with free of insect damage.
Soil should be ploughed to a depth of  cm and worked to a very fine tilth.
Prepare raised beds  m wide and  cm high.
Incorporate  tonsha of cattle manure or compost to beds and level.
Cabbage originated from the South and Western part of Europe.
Annual world production is about million tones of fresh heads from million hectares.
In Sri Lanka cabbage is one of the important vegetable is cultivated in large extent mainly in the upcountry as a year round crop.
In the low country it is only during Maha season.
Among the other vegetables cabbage is one of the easiest crop to established and manage thus most of the people grow this crop in their home gardens.
It is also an important economical and rotational crop in the major vegetable growing areas.
First clean the field and break the large clods into small particles and make fine texture soil.
Then prepare the bed.
Apply paddy husk and straw layers on the surface of the bed and fire from the opposite of the wind direction to sterilize the bed.
Put seeds about  cm deep on the lines that maintain  cm space with the lines.
Apply fungicide to control Damping off and Anthracnose.
Water to the bed and mulch it by using paddy straw.
Then cover the beds by using polyethylene that should not be transparent to avoid sun rays and rain.
Remove the mulch after  days.
Germination period will be  days.
Remove the polyethylene cover  days before planting to hardening.
The young plants are seen fed upon and cut at base.
The leaves and developing cabbage heads are riddled with holes.
The caterpillars hide during day time and come out to feed at night.
It coils itself and feigns death when disturbed.
Leaves show feeding holes with or without webbing and soiled with excreta.
At present the crop is cultivated in an extent of  ha annually and the total production is approximately  Mt.
The average yield is Mtha.
The major producing districts are Nuwara Eliya Badulla Kandy and Matale.
Bitter gourd is popular due to its medicinal properties.
Origin of the crop is unknown but it is widely spread throughout the tropics.
The fruit is a good source of iron calcium phosphorus and vitamin B.
In Sri Lanka Bitter gourd is eaten as a vegetable.
It can be successfully grown on elevation from sea level to about m. It can be cultivated in low country and mid country during both seasons.
The identified districts for Bitter gourd production are Kurunegala Hambantota Ratnapura Kandy Matale Nuwara Eliya Anuradhapura Puttalam and Ampara districts.
The identified districts of Kurunagala Hambantota Ratnapura Kandy and Matale Nuwara Eliya Anuradhapura Puttalam and Amparai will be the major Bitter gourd cultivating areas in Sri Lanka.
The fruit is used as vegetable as well as it can be used as a medicine for diabetics and vermifuge .
Nutritional composition.
The recommended varieties are Thinnavely white and mc.
Although the other two genotypes are similar to Thinnaveli white and mc but dark green in colour are popular among the farmers.
Bitter gourd peak production months during the Maha season are January February and the first two weeks of March and April May June and July for the Yaha season.
The postharvest loss of bitter gourd is about .
Main reason for this much of loss is due to ripening and mechanical damage during transport.
Reduction of postharvest loss minimizes the unit production cost and the price gap between grower and consumer.
Due to warty nature of the fruit the transport damage is very high.
Further using poly sack bags for packing causes a severe damage to the fruit.
If fruits are carefully transported postharvest loss can be minimized to a greater extent.
Bitter gourd can be stored at ambient temperature for  days if they are harvested in a slightly immature stage.
However this storage life can further be extended by storing them at  deg C. The maximum storage life at low temperature is limited to  days.
Value addition of bitter gourd can be done by dehydration.
Thin slices can be dehydrated and this technology is adopted in a small scale for domestic purposes.
A better quality product can be prepared if driers are used for dehydration.
In addition slices of this fruit can be preserved in brine solution.
During  to  the total cultivated extent ranged between  ha and  ha and total production l and t. There were no significant changes over this  year period with regard to total extent and total production.
However during the Maha season cultivation the extent and production were higher than the Yala season except during .
This might be due to the prevalence of favourable weather conditions during the Maha season.
The unit production cost for the  to  is given in the table showing that the production costs were similar during   and .
The projected unit area cost of production during  is low the reason being the inducement and encouragement given to the farmers to adopt the appropriate crop management technology through demonstration programme.
There is an export potential for mature fruits with fresh appearance and dehydrated fruits.
Pumpkin is one of popular vegetables among the Sri Lankans.
It is native to Central America Pumpkin is a nutritious vegetable vine plant which date back many centuries.
It was one of the major ingredients of the staple diet of native Americans and colonists.
It can be prepared various ways.
There are about  species of cucurbita.
The spherical shaped fruits range in weight from less thankg to more than kg.
Its ability to grow to such a large size makes it the largest fruit in the plant kingdom.
The pumpkin plant which grow up to  feet long produces both male and female bright yellow coloured flowers with five petals.
The female flower has a little pumpkin at the bottom.
The leaves are lobed with  or  lobes.
Pumpkins were used to treat bladder problems and as a pain killer.
Its seeds are an excellent source of fat and protein.
Well drainage soil with high amount of organic matter important to well growth.
Optimum pH range is about..Regular watering is important up to seed germination.
After germination water should be applied once in  days.
Weeding should be done at three weeks after germination.
Hand weeding is most suitable.
A mulch of straw can be used to prevent weed growth.
It is fungal disease.
Leaves become yellow in colour.
White colour spores are visible on both sides of the leaves.
It is a fungal disease.
Rotting is visible on lower portion of the stem and on the surface of the fruits.
Avoid high moisture and relative humidity improve soil aeration use recommended fungicides.
Female gall fly lay eggs on small pods and the larvae feed on flesh of the fruit.
Due to this damage the flower and pod drop.
Sometimes rotting of pods also occurs.
Mix the recommended amount of lebycide mixed with water.
Add g of sugar in to  litre.
It can be applied flowering stage once in two weeks.
Matured fruit of pumpkin can be stored in dry place for  months.
Leek is a typical cool climate vegetable which belongs to the family Liliacea and it is being successfully grown in up country wet zone    msl and    mm rainfall which is the most suitable area for leek cultivation.
Leek can also be grown in up country intermediate zone   msl and    mm rainfall.
Large Long Summer is the only variety recommended and it is very popular among the farmers.
Leek is a long age crop compared to other up country vegetables.
In Nuwara Eliya farmers cultivate leek in a mix cropping system with beet carrot and lettuce to increase the crop productivity and land used intensity.
In this area it is being cultivated year round under irrigated condition with the addition of high organic matter.
Leek is tolerant to wet weather and frost.
The total extend cultivated is around  ha Table .
The present per capita availability iskgpersonyear.
The post harvest loss for leeks is around  .
Leek has a good potential in the export market and presently it is sent to Maldives islands Middle east and other countries Customs Department .
The nutritive value per g dry matter of leek is given bellow.
The total extend ranged between   ha and the production range between  mt during  period.
It was also evident that the cultivated extent and production during the Maha season were greater that of the Yala.
This is probably due to the availability of water during the Maha season compared to that of Yala season.
Nuwara Eliya district produces  of the total production of Leek and it is cultivated throughout the year.
Hence production of leek is more or less stable and there is no real peak production month as other vegetables.
The export volume and the export value during    periods are presented in the Table .
It could be noted that there was an increase in export volume of leek in  and .
Major portion of the cost of production accounts for labour  and fertilizer .
The other important factor that contributes to high cost of production is seed .
The cost of fertilizer could be cut down; if farmers realized the benefit of use of straight fertilizer which reduces the fertilizer cost by .
Labour could be saved if mix cropping with beetroot or carrot is adopted.
Cost of pesticide could also be cut down if need based spraying for pests and diseases is adopted.
Luffa is another cucurbit native to Asia cultivated since ancient times.
Luffa can only be eaten when young as mature fruits become very bitter due to the development of purgative chemicals.
It is an annual climbing herb.
Male and female flowers are formed separately on the same vine.
The crop was probably originated in India and now widely grown throughout the India and tropical Asia.
In Sri Lanka it is one of a popular vegetable.
It is well grown in low country dry zone intermediate zone as well as wet zone.
High temperatures   C are required for reasonable  seed germination and early growth in L. acutangula.
Long days and high temperatures favored the development of more female flowers than short days and lower growing temperatures.
Luffa can be cultivated up to  AMSL.
Heavy rain not suitable for the cultivation.
Luffa needs plenty of moisture while growing.
It yields well in warm climates.
The plant prefers deep well drained sandy loam soils rich in organic matter with a pH ranging to.
Excessive water can result in poor growth and root disease.
Damping off can be a problem with young seedlings if growing in cool wet conditions and fruit rots may cause losses if the fruit are allowed to grow on the ground.
Okra is one of the most popular fruit vegetables grown in Wet Intermediate and Dry zone of Sri Lanka.
Presently okra is successfully cultivated in the districts of Hambantota Kurunagala Ratnapura and Matale.
Also it is expanding in potential districts like Anuradhapura Puttalam Matara Badulla and Moneragala.
The total area under okra cultivation is reported to be  ha producing average yield of Mtha thus the total annual okra production in Sri Lanka is  Mt with a per capita availability of kgha.
The increase in productivity will be targeted basically due to increase in cultivated extent as well as increase in unit yield.
It is expected that the annual production in year  will reach  Mt increasing the extent  ha and increasing average yield from Mt to  Mtha.
Fruits  light green medium size pyramidal elongated edged  stem colour  light to medium anthocyanin pigmentation upper leaves deeply lobed suitable for yala and maha season except yala in the Dry zone.
Fruits  yellowish green medium size pyramidal elongated edged  stem colour  medium anthocyanin pigmentation upper leaves  shallowly lobed suitable for yala season in the Dry zone and both yala and maha season in other regions.
The climate is suitable for okra in all agroclimatic regions in the Dry Intermediate and Wet zone with the exception of the up county Wet zone.
In drier parts of the up county okra grows well to elevation of about  m. In Mid county Wet zone Maha rains may restrict plant growth and adversely effects yields.
Welldrained soils with a Ph around neutral are most suitable.
Water logging should be avoided.
Okra is generally planted from late September to early October in maha and April to early may in yala.
Avoid planting during heavy rains.
Water daily until germination is complete and  days intervals thereafter.
Weed  and  weeks after emergence and at early flowering.
Weeding  weeks after planting should coincide with fertilizer application.
Redbodied bugs are seen feeding and moving on plants particularly they crowd on mature pods and damage seeds.
Apply insecticide if the damage is serious only.
Appearance of conical leaf rolls hanging from the leaves.
Green caterpillars is seen inside the rolls.
Scattered white patches appear on the upper surface of leaves and coalesce to form a powdery coating.
Heavily attack leaves dry up and drop off.
Winged bean can be grown from sea level up to  m in either maha or yala seasons.
As a short day plant it has a critical day length of about  hours.
However some improved varieties are not sensitive to photoperiod and produce pods throughout the year.
Hence these varieties can be cultivated during both maha and yala seasons.
Winged bean can be grown on soil types ranging from sandy to heavy clays.
The crop can be grown on alkaline soils but a welldrained sandy loam rich in organic matter is preferred.
Exported to the middle eastern countries and the Maldives together with other Beans.
At present a total of approximately  ha are reported to have under beet cultivation and per capita consumption is estimated to be around kgyear.
It is rich in several vitamins does not contain significant amount of any nutritional factors.
Hence this is an ideal vegetable for health conscious people.
Beet can be grown in all agroecological regions in the country.
However could be successfully cultivated in Sri Lanka in Nuwara Eliya Badulla Kandy and Matale districts.
Nuwara Eliya district has the largest extent of cultivation and peak production could be expected from other districts and Nuwara Eliya throughout the year.
Under irrigated condition Beetroot could be cultivated in areas like Kegalle Kurunegala Moneragala Anuradhapura Ratnapura Matale Hambantota and Jaffna in the country.
Being an up country vegetable farmers have to depend on imported seeds.
Hence several private seed importers supply the entire seed requirement which is about  mtyear.
With the targeted production extent of  ha in  the seed requirement will be increased to Mt.
Major portion of this seed would be of Crimson Globe since this is the most popular variety among farmers both in wet and dry zone.
On foliage larvae make on lower leaf surfaces and usually are associated with the midrib and lateral veins.
A mine usually begins on the upper leaf surface and moves to the lower surface after a few millimeters of feeding by the larva.
Adults punching leaves for both feeding and oviposition.
Punctures and mines may be numerous enough to greatly reduce photosynthesis and may kill young plants.
These mines and punctures further reduced the value of ornamental plants.
Inspection of the fields before and after cultivation of the crop is needed for the proper management of the Liriomyza huidobrensis.
Knowledge on cropping pattern and distribution pattern of the leaf miner in the region is important to achieve successful management of this pest.
At present this it is well established in the region.
Later two local hymenopteran parasitoids Hemiptarsenoideus semiabiclavus and Opius spp.
were identified.
However introduced parasitoid is showing more than  of the parasitism compared to two other parasitoids in the region.
Major portion of the cost of production accounts for fertilizer  and labour .
The other important factor that contributes to high cost of production is pesticides .
The cost of fertilizer could be cut down; if farmers are made realized the benefit of use of straight fertilizer.
This would cut down the fertilizer cost by .
Labour could be saved if mixed cropping with leeks or carrot is adopted.
Cost of pesticide could also be cut down if need based spraying for pests and diseases is adopted.
The cucumber is one of the most important market vegetables in the tropics and it is also the basis of an extensive pickling industry.
It is assumed to be a native of the Northern India.
In Sri Lanka cucumber is best eaten sliced as a salad or as an appetizer with other vegetables because of its distinct flavor and texture.
This crop can be grown throughout the year in the wetzone and during Maha season in the dryzone to an elevation of about  m. The identified districts for cucumber production are Kurunegala Matale and Hambantota and the potential districts are Puttalam Colombo Matara Badulla Moneragala Polonnaruwa and Anuradhapura.
The fruit is used as a vegetable or salad.
The immature fruit is cooked and given to children for dysentery.
The seeds are considered cooling and used as a diuretic.
During this period the total cultivated extent ranged between  ha and  ha and the production ranged between  t and  t indicating that both the extent and the production did not appreciably change over the year period.
It was also evident that the cultivation extent and the production during the Maha season were higher than that during the Yala season probably due to the prevalence of favorable weather conditions during the Maha season compared to that during the Yala season for the crop.
Overall the monthly average wholesale and retail prices did not vary very much with the year.
The retail prices were  times higher than the wholesale prices.
Further the wholesale and the retail prices were high during the lean production period and low during the peak production period in a given year.
This produce price fluctuation scenario can be overcome through adopting offseason production and produce storage techniques.
Radish which originated from Europe or Asia is presently cultivated all over the world.
In Sri Lanka Radish is one of the vegetables that can be grown in all agro ecological regions throughout the year if adequate moisture is available.
Two varieties Japan ball Rabu and Beeralu Rabu are recommended for upcountry and low country respectively.
Long and redspring radishes that are mainly used for salad and decorative purposes have high demand for hotel industry.
In addition radish is used for pickling and other processing industries.
Radish is widely cultivated in the districts of Nuwaraeliya Badulla Kalutura and Galle.
Among other districts where it could be successfully grown are Kandy Matale Gampaha and Ratnapura.
The popular varieties Japan Ball Rabu and Beeralu Rabu are widely cultivated by the farmers in the Up country and Low country respectively.
The private sector farmer organization and the farmers are the major source of seed supply.
Department of Agriculture is supplying the total demand of Basic seed of Beeralu Rabu while seeds of Ball Rabu is imported by various private companies.
Seeds of all the other varieties Long and Red radish available in the market are also supplied by the private sector.
On foliage larvae make on lower leaf surfaces and usually are associated with the midrib and lateral veins.
A mine usually begins on the upper leaf surface and moves to the lower surface after a few millimeters of feeding by the larva.
Adults punching leaves for both feeding and oviposition.
Punctures and mines may be numerous enough to greatly reduce photosynthesis and may kill young plants.
These mines and punctures further reduced the value of ornamental plants.
Inspection of the fields before and after cultivation of the crop is needed for the proper management of the Liriomyza huidobrensis.
Knowledge on cropping pattern and distribution pattern of the leaf miner in the region is important to achieve successful management of this pest.
Diglypus isaea a hymenopteran parasitoid was introduced in .
At present this it is well established in the region.
Later two local hymenopteran parasitoids Hemiptarsenoideus semiabiclavus and Opius spp.
were identified.
However introduced parasitoid is showing more than  of the parasitism compared to two other parasitoids in the region.
The District wise estimated extents and production for  Maha  Yala and  Maha are given in Table.
The districts of Nuwara Eliya Badulla Matara Moneragala Ratnapura Kandy Kurunegala Kalutara Galle and Hambantota will be the major contributors to the total production in the future.
Labour  is the highest cost component in radish cultivation follows with seed  pesticide  and fertilizer  Source Department of Census and Statistics .
The unit cost of production for the period of  is given in Table.
The estimated production cost indicates that increasing the productivity of the crop by adopting appropriate technologies could reduce the unit cost of production.
Uniform shape length >  cm and width  cm with white skin color are the requirements for export market.
In addition the skin should be free of blemishes physical injuries and pest and disease damages.
Usage of proper varieties adoption of appropriate management practices and pre and post harvest handling improve the quality of produce for export market.
Increase in productivity total production per capita consumption extent under cultivation and demand and volume for export are the progress indicators for the expansion of radish cultivation.
The growth of ovaries can be damaged in any case.
Elephants larvae are prone to rot in the larvae.
Whirling the earth around the vines can destroy the situation.
Remove the damaged ears and destroy them.
In the very early stages the gills can be controlled by a thin shoot or a piece of paper.
See the Irrigates control in the caraway plantation.
Additionally cotton beetles hornbeam birds and epilectine beetles can also cause crop damage.
The root cortical blade damage decreases the nutrient and water required for the growth of the plant.
The presence of a leaf in a leaf a small leaf and the development of drowsy trees can help to identify the damage.
Continuous use of organic fertilizers can help to improve the soil moisture and improve the beneficial life span of the crop.
In addition to fattening goulashing
The damage is common.
At the beginning of the plucking remove the shoots.
Only use propenoicipharmaceuticals every  days if the damage is severe.
Goutvirus and Flue Mow disease can be seriously affected by goat cultivation.
Then apply the recommended fungicide.
If the mild rot is damaged on the base of the body develop the soils water.
Improve the soil loosening the soil.
Spikes longer than one meter in length are white.
With the ripening of the shoots there are dark green leaves on the pods.
A crop of warm climatic conditions.
Increases in temperatures higher than  degrees Celsius
Increase.
It can be successfully cultivated in the areas up to  sq.
M. During the Yala season the dry zone can also be grown during the year in the wet zone.
However by overcoming the heavy rains more yield can be obtained.
After  weeks after planting remove the remaining plants to save  healthy plants in one hatch.
Provide almost daily water until germination.
Then provide water on a regular basis according to need.
By applying a mud around vines dry soil can be reduced when there is dry weather.
Pay attention to weed control during the first case of crop.
When the vines grow well the weeds are not problematic.
To prevent damage to the reefs tie bundles of ropes or coconut branches in bundles.
The wellused grassy days can be kept in the range of  days.
The storage temperature can be stored at  relative humidity to store about  weeks.